{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2636
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww28600\viewh15160\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \'93The Forsyte Saga\'94 was the title originally destined for that\
part of it which is called \'93The Man of Property\'94; and to adopt it\
      for the collected chronicles of the Forsyte family has indulged\
      the Forsytean tenacity that is in all of us. The word Saga might\
      be objected to on the ground that it connotes the heroic and that\
      there is little heroism in these pages. But it is used with a\
      suitable irony; and, after all, this long tale, though it may\
      deal with folk in frock coats, furbelows, and a gilt-edged\
      period, is not devoid of the essential heat of conflict.\
      Discounting for the gigantic stature and blood-thirstiness of old\
      days, as they have come down to us in fairy-tale and legend, the\
      folk of the old Sagas were Forsytes, assuredly, in their\
      possessive instincts, and as little proof against the inroads of\
      beauty and passion as Swithin, Soames, or even Young Jolyon. And\
      if heroic figures, in days that never were, seem to startle out\
      from their surroundings in fashion unbecoming to a Forsyte of the\
      Victorian era, we may be sure that tribal instinct was even then\
      the prime force, and that \'93family\'94 and the sense of home and\
      property counted as they do to this day, for all the recent\
      efforts to \'93talk them out.\'94\
\
      So many people have written and claimed that their families were\
      the originals of the Forsytes that one has been almost encouraged\
      to believe in the typicality of an imagined species. Manners\
      change and modes evolve, and \'93Timothy\'92s on the Bayswater Road\'94\
      becomes a nest of the unbelievable in all except essentials; we\
      shall not look upon its like again, nor perhaps on such a one as\
      James or Old Jolyon. And yet the figures of Insurance Societies\
      and the utterances of Judges reassure us daily that our earthly\
      paradise is still a rich preserve, where the wild raiders, Beauty\
      and Passion, come stealing in, filching security from beneath our\
      noses. As surely as a dog will bark at a brass band, so will the\
      essential Soames in human nature ever rise up uneasily against\
      the dissolution which hovers round the folds of ownership.\
\
      \'93Let the dead Past bury its dead\'94 would be a better saying if the\
      Past ever died. The persistence of the Past is one of those\
      tragi-comic blessings which each new age denies, coming cocksure\
      on to the stage to mouth its claim to a perfect novelty.\
\
      But no Age is so new as that! Human Nature, under its changing\
      pretensions and clothes, is and ever will be very much of a\
      Forsyte, and might, after all, be a much worse animal.\
\
      Looking back on the Victorian era, whose ripeness, decline, and\
      \'93fall-of\'94 is in some sort pictured in \'93The Forsyte Saga,\'94 we see\
      now that we have but jumped out of a frying-pan into a fire. It\
      would be difficult to substantiate a claim that the case of\
      England was better in 1913 than it was in 1886, when the Forsytes\
      assembled at Old Jolyon\'92s to celebrate the engagement of June to\
      Philip Bosinney. And in 1920, when again the clan gathered to\
      bless the marriage of Fleur with Michael Mont, the state of\
      England is as surely too molten and bankrupt as in the eighties\
      it was too congealed and low-percented. If these chronicles had\
      been a really scientific study of transition one would have dwelt\
      probably on such factors as the invention of bicycle, motor-car,\
      and flying-machine; the arrival of a cheap Press; the decline of\
      country life and increase of the towns; the birth of the Cinema.\
      Men are, in fact, quite unable to control their own inventions;\
      they at best develop adaptability to the new conditions those\
      inventions create.\
\
      But this long tale is no scientific study of a period; it is\
      rather an intimate incarnation of the disturbance that Beauty\
      effects in the lives of men.\
\
      The figure of Irene, never, as the reader may possibly have\
      observed, present, except through the senses of other characters,\
      is a concretion of disturbing Beauty impinging on a possessive\
      world.\
\
      One has noticed that readers, as they wade on through the salt\
      waters of the Saga, are inclined more and more to pity Soames,\
      and to think that in doing so they are in revolt against the mood\
      of his creator. Far from it! He, too, pities Soames, the tragedy\
      of whose life is the very simple, uncontrollable tragedy of being\
      unlovable, without quite a thick enough skin to be thoroughly\
      unconscious of the fact. Not even Fleur loves Soames as he feels\
      he ought to be loved. But in pitying Soames, readers incline,\
      perhaps, to animus against Irene: After all, they think, he\
      wasn\'92t a bad fellow, it wasn\'92t his fault; she ought to have\
      forgiven him, and so on!\
\
      And, taking sides, they lose perception of the simple truth,\
      which underlies the whole story, that where sex attraction is\
      utterly and definitely lacking in one partner to a union, no\
      amount of pity, or reason, or duty, or what not, can overcome a\
      repulsion implicit in Nature. Whether it ought to, or no, is\
      beside the point; because in fact it never does. And where Irene\
      seems hard and cruel, as in the Bois de Boulogne, or the Goupenor\
      Gallery, she is but wisely realistic\'97knowing that the least\
      concession is the inch which precedes the impossible, the\
      repulsive ell.\
\
      A criticism one might pass on the last phase of the Saga is the\
      complaint that Irene and Jolyon those rebels against\
      property\'97claim spiritual property in their son Jon. But it would\
      be hypercriticism, as the tale is told. No father and mother\
      could have let the boy marry Fleur without knowledge of the\
      facts; and the facts determine Jon, not the persuasion of his\
      parents. Moreover, Jolyon\'92s persuasion is not on his own account,\
      but on Irene\'92s, and Irene\'92s persuasion becomes a reiterated:\
      \'93Don\'92t think of me, think of yourself!\'94 That Jon, knowing the\
      facts, can realise his mother\'92s feelings, will hardly with\
      justice be held proof that she is, after all, a Forsyte.\
\
      But though the impingement of Beauty and the claims of Freedom on\
      a possessive world are the main prepossessions of the Forsyte\
      Saga, it cannot be absolved from the charge of embalming the\
      upper-middle class. As the old Egyptians placed around their\
      mummies the necessaries of a future existence, so I have\
      endeavoured to lay beside the figures of Aunts Ann and Juley and\
      Hester, of Timothy and Swithin, of Old Jolyon and James, and of\
      their sons, that which shall guarantee them a little life\
      here-after, a little balm in the hurried Gilead of a dissolving\
      \'93Progress.\'94\
\
      If the upper-middle class, with other classes, is destined to\
      \'93move on\'94 into amorphism, here, pickled in these pages, it lies\
      under glass for strollers in the wide and ill-arranged museum of\
      Letters. Here it rests, preserved in its own juice: The Sense of\
      Property. 1922.\
\
      PART I\
\
      CHAPTER I \'93AT HOME\'94 AT OLD JOLYON\'92S\
\
\
      Those privileged to be present at a family festival of the\
      Forsytes have seen that charming and instructive sight\'97an upper\
      middle-class family in full plumage. But whosoever of these\
      favoured persons has possessed the gift of psychological analysis\
      (a talent without monetary value and properly ignored by the\
      Forsytes), has witnessed a spectacle, not only delightful in\
      itself, but illustrative of an obscure human problem. In plainer\
      words, he has gleaned from a gathering of this family\'97no branch\
      of which had a liking for the other, between no three members of\
      whom existed anything worthy of the name of sympathy\'97evidence of\
      that mysterious concrete tenacity which renders a family so\
      formidable a unit of society, so clear a reproduction of society\
      in miniature. He has been admitted to a vision of the dim roads\
      of social progress, has understood something of patriarchal life,\
      of the swarmings of savage hordes, of the rise and fall of\
      nations. He is like one who, having watched a tree grow from its\
      planting\'97a paragon of tenacity, insulation, and success, amidst\
      the deaths of a hundred other plants less fibrous, sappy, and\
      persistent\'97one day will see it flourishing with bland, full\
      foliage, in an almost repugnant prosperity, at the summit of its\
      efflorescence.\
\
      On June 15, eighteen eighty-six, about four of the afternoon, the\
      observer who chanced to be present at the house of old Jolyon\
      Forsyte in Stanhope Gate, might have seen the highest\
      efflorescence of the Forsytes.\
\
      This was the occasion of an \'93at home\'94 to celebrate the engagement\
      of Miss June Forsyte, old Jolyon\'92s granddaughter, to Mr. Philip\
      Bosinney. In the bravery of light gloves, buff waistcoats,\
      feathers and frocks, the family were present, even Aunt Ann, who\
      now but seldom left the corner of her brother Timothy\'92s green\
      drawing-room, where, under the aegis of a plume of dyed pampas\
      grass in a light blue vase, she sat all day reading and knitting,\
      surrounded by the effigies of three generations of Forsytes. Even\
      Aunt Ann was there; her inflexible back, and the dignity of her\
      calm old face personifying the rigid possessiveness of the family\
      idea.\
\
      When a Forsyte was engaged, married, or born, the Forsytes were\
      present; when a Forsyte died\'97but no Forsyte had as yet died; they\
      did not die; death being contrary to their principles, they took\
      precautions against it, the instinctive precautions of highly\
      vitalized persons who resent encroachments on their property.\
\
      About the Forsytes mingling that day with the crowd of other\
      guests, there was a more than ordinarily groomed look, an alert,\
      inquisitive assurance, a brilliant respectability, as though they\
      were attired in defiance of something. The habitual sniff on the\
      face of Soames Forsyte had spread through their ranks; they were\
      on their guard.\
\
      The subconscious offensiveness of their attitude has constituted\
      old Jolyon\'92s \'93home\'94 the psychological moment of the family\
      history, made it the prelude of their drama.\
\
      The Forsytes were resentful of something, not individually, but\
      as a family; this resentment expressed itself in an added\
      perfection of raiment, an exuberance of family cordiality, an\
      exaggeration of family importance, and\'97the sniff. Danger\'97so\
      indispensable in bringing out the fundamental quality of any\
      society, group, or individual\'97was what the Forsytes scented; the\
      premonition of danger put a burnish on their armour. For the\
      first time, as a family, they appeared to have an instinct of\
      being in contact, with some strange and unsafe thing.\
\
      Over against the piano a man of bulk and stature was wearing two\
      waistcoats on his wide chest, two waistcoats and a ruby pin,\
      instead of the single satin waistcoat and diamond pin of more\
      usual occasions, and his shaven, square, old face, the colour of\
      pale leather, with pale eyes, had its most dignified look, above\
      his satin stock. This was Swithin Forsyte. Close to the window,\
      where he could get more than his fair share of fresh air, the\
      other twin, James\'97the fat and the lean of it, old Jolyon called\
      these brothers\'97like the bulky Swithin, over six feet in height,\
      but very lean, as though destined from his birth to strike a\
      balance and maintain an average, brooded over the scene with his\
      permanent stoop; his grey eyes had an air of fixed absorption in\
      some secret worry, broken at intervals by a rapid, shifting\
      scrutiny of surrounding facts; his cheeks, thinned by two\
      parallel folds, and a long, clean-shaven upper lip, were framed\
      within Dundreary whiskers. In his hands he turned and turned a\
      piece of china. Not far off, listening to a lady in brown, his\
      only son Soames, pale and well-shaved, dark-haired, rather bald,\
      had poked his chin up sideways, carrying his nose with that\
      aforesaid appearance of \'93sniff,\'94 as though despising an egg which\
      he knew he could not digest. Behind him his cousin, the tall\
      George, son of the fifth Forsyte, Roger, had a Quilpish look on\
      his fleshy face, pondering one of his sardonic jests. Something\
      inherent to the occasion had affected them all.\
\
      Seated in a row close to one another were three ladies\'97Aunts Ann,\
      Hester (the two Forsyte maids), and Juley (short for Julia), who\
      not in first youth had so far forgotten herself as to marry\
      Septimus Small, a man of poor constitution. She had survived him\
      for many years. With her elder and younger sister she lived now\
      in the house of Timothy, her sixth and youngest brother, on the\
      Bayswater Road. Each of these ladies held fans in their hands,\
      and each with some touch of colour, some emphatic feather or\
      brooch, testified to the solemnity of the opportunity.\
\
      In the centre of the room, under the chandelier, as became a\
      host, stood the head of the family, old Jolyon himself. Eighty\
      years of age, with his fine, white hair, his dome-like forehead,\
      his little, dark grey eyes, and an immense white moustache, which\
      drooped and spread below the level of his strong jaw, he had a\
      patriarchal look, and in spite of lean cheeks and hollows at his\
      temples, seemed master of perennial youth. He held himself\
      extremely upright, and his shrewd, steady eyes had lost none of\
      their clear shining. Thus he gave an impression of superiority to\
      the doubts and dislikes of smaller men. Having had his own way\
      for innumerable years, he had earned a prescriptive right to it.\
      It would never have occurred to old Jolyon that it was necessary\
      to wear a look of doubt or of defiance.\
\
      Between him and the four other brothers who were present, James,\
      Swithin, Nicholas, and Roger, there was much difference, much\
      similarity. In turn, each of these four brothers was very\
      different from the other, yet they, too, were alike.\
\
      Through the varying features and expression of those five faces\
      could be marked a certain steadfastness of chin, underlying\
      surface distinctions, marking a racial stamp, too prehistoric to\
      trace, too remote and permanent to discuss\'97the very hall-mark and\
      guarantee of the family fortunes.\
\
      Among the younger generation, in the tall, bull-like George, in\
      pallid strenuous Archibald, in young Nicholas with his sweet and\
      tentative obstinacy, in the grave and foppishly determined\
      Eustace, there was this same stamp\'97less meaningful perhaps, but\
      unmistakable\'97a sign of something ineradicable in the family soul.\
      At one time or another during the afternoon, all these faces, so\
      dissimilar and so alike, had worn an expression of distrust, the\
      object of which was undoubtedly the man whose acquaintance they\
      were thus assembled to make. Philip Bosinney was known to be a\
      young man without fortune, but Forsyte girls had become engaged\
      to such before, and had actually married them. It was not\
      altogether for this reason, therefore, that the minds of the\
      Forsytes misgave them. They could not have explained the origin\
      of a misgiving obscured by the mist of family gossip. A story was\
      undoubtedly told that he had paid his duty call to Aunts Ann,\
      Juley, and Hester, in a soft grey hat\'97a soft grey hat, not even a\
      new one\'97a dusty thing with a shapeless crown. \'93So, extraordinary,\
      my dear\'97so odd,\'94 Aunt Hester, passing through the little, dark\
      hall (she was rather short-sighted), had tried to \'93shoo\'94 it off a\
      chair, taking it for a strange, disreputable cat\'97Tommy had such\
      disgraceful friends! She was disturbed when it did not move.\
\
      Like an artist for ever seeking to discover the significant\
      trifle which embodies the whole character of a scene, or place,\
      or person, so those unconscious artists\'97the Forsytes had fastened\
      by intuition on this hat; it was their significant trifle, the\
      detail in which was embedded the meaning of the whole matter; for\
      each had asked himself: \'93Come, now, should _I_ have paid that\
      visit in that hat?\'94 and each had answered \'93No!\'94 and some, with\
      more imagination than others, had added: \'93It would never have\
      come into my head!\'94\
\
      George, on hearing the story, grinned. The hat had obviously been\
      worn as a practical joke! He himself was a connoisseur of such.\
      \'93Very haughty!\'94 he said, \'93the wild Buccaneer.\'94\
\
      And this mot, the \'93Buccaneer,\'94 was bandied from mouth to mouth,\
      till it became the favourite mode of alluding to Bosinney.\
\
      Her aunts reproached June afterwards about the hat.\
\
      \'93We don\'92t think you ought to let him, dear!\'94 they had said.\
\
      June had answered in her imperious brisk way, like the little\
      embodiment of will she was: \'93Oh! what does it matter? Phil never\
      knows what he\'92s got on!\'94\
\
      No one had credited an answer so outrageous. A man not to know\
      what he had on? No, no! What indeed was this young man, who, in\
      becoming engaged to June, old Jolyon\'92s acknowledged heiress, had\
      done so well for himself? He was an architect, not in itself a\
      sufficient reason for wearing such a hat. None of the Forsytes\
      happened to be architects, but one of them knew two architects\
      who would never have worn such a hat upon a call of ceremony in\
      the London season.\
\
      Dangerous\'97ah, dangerous! June, of course, had not seen this, but,\
      though not yet nineteen, she was notorious. Had she not said to\
      Mrs. Soames\'97who was always so beautifully dressed\'97that feathers\
      were vulgar? Mrs. Soames had actually given up wearing feathers,\
      so dreadfully downright was dear June!\
\
      These misgivings, this disapproval, and perfectly genuine\
      distrust, did not prevent the Forsytes from gathering to old\
      Jolyon\'92s invitation. An \'93At Home\'94 at Stanhope Gate was a great\
      rarity; none had been held for twelve years, not indeed, since\
      old Mrs. Jolyon had died.\
\
      Never had there been so full an assembly, for, mysteriously\
      united in spite of all their differences, they had taken arms\
      against a common peril. Like cattle when a dog comes into the\
      field, they stood head to head and shoulder to shoulder, prepared\
      to run upon and trample the invader to death. They had come, too,\
      no doubt, to get some notion of what sort of presents they would\
      ultimately be expected to give; for though the question of\
      wedding gifts was usually graduated in this way: \'93What are _you_\
      givin\'92. Nicholas is givin\'92 spoons!\'94\'97so very much depended on the\
      bridegroom. If he were sleek, well-brushed, prosperous-looking,\
      it was more necessary to give him nice things; he would expect\
      them. In the end each gave exactly what was right and proper, by\
      a species of family adjustment arrived at as prices are arrived\
      at on the Stock Exchange\'97the exact niceties being regulated at\
      Timothy\'92s commodious, red-brick residence in Bayswater,\
      overlooking the Park, where dwelt Aunts Ann, Juley, and Hester.\
\
      The uneasiness of the Forsyte family has been justified by the\
      simple mention of the hat. How impossible and wrong would it have\
      been for any family, with the regard for appearances which should\
      ever characterize the great upper middle-class, to feel otherwise\
      than uneasy!\
\
      The author of the uneasiness stood talking to June by the further\
      door; his curly hair had a rumpled appearance, as though he found\
      what was going on around him unusual. He had an air, too, of\
      having a joke all to himself. George, speaking aside to his\
      brother, Eustace, said:\
\
      \'93Looks as if he might make a bolt of it\'97the dashing Buccaneer!\'94\
\
      This \'93very singular-looking man,\'94 as Mrs. Small afterwards called\
      him, was of medium height and strong build, with a pale, brown\
      face, a dust-coloured moustache, very prominent cheek-bones, and\
      hollow checks. His forehead sloped back towards the crown of his\
      head, and bulged out in bumps over the eyes, like foreheads seen\
      in the Lion-house at the Zoo. He had sherry-coloured eyes,\
      disconcertingly inattentive at times. Old Jolyon\'92s coachman,\
      after driving June and Bosinney to the theatre, had remarked to\
      the butler:\
\
      \'93I dunno what to make of \'92im. Looks to me for all the world like\
      an \'92alf-tame leopard.\'94 And every now and then a Forsyte would\
      come up, sidle round, and take a look at him.\
\
      June stood in front, fending off this idle curiosity\'97a little bit\
      of a thing, as somebody once said, \'93all hair and spirit,\'94 with\
      fearless blue eyes, a firm jaw, and a bright colour, whose face\
      and body seemed too slender for her crown of red-gold hair.\
\
      A tall woman, with a beautiful figure, which some member of the\
      family had once compared to a heathen goddess, stood looking at\
      these two with a shadowy smile.\
\
      Her hands, gloved in French grey, were crossed one over the\
      other, her grave, charming face held to one side, and the eyes of\
      all men near were fastened on it. Her figure swayed, so balanced\
      that the very air seemed to set it moving. There was warmth, but\
      little colour, in her cheeks; her large, dark eyes were soft.\
\
      But it was at her lips\'97asking a question, giving an answer, with\
      that shadowy smile\'97that men looked; they were sensitive lips,\
      sensuous and sweet, and through them seemed to come warmth and\
      perfume like the warmth and perfume of a flower.\
\
      The engaged couple thus scrutinized were unconscious of this\
      passive goddess. It was Bosinney who first noticed her, and asked\
      her name.\
\
      June took her lover up to the woman with the beautiful figure.\
\
      \'93Irene is my greatest chum,\'94 she said: \'93Please be good friends,\
      you two!\'94\
\
      At the little lady\'92s command they all three smiled; and while\
      they were smiling, Soames Forsyte, silently appearing from behind\
      the woman with the beautiful figure, who was his wife, said:\
\
      \'93Ah! introduce me too!\'94\
\
      He was seldom, indeed, far from Irene\'92s side at public functions,\
      and even when separated by the exigencies of social intercourse,\
      could be seen following her about with his eyes, in which were\
      strange expressions of watchfulness and longing.\
\
      At the window his father, James, was still scrutinizing the marks\
      on the piece of china.\
\
      \'93I wonder at Jolyon\'92s allowing this engagement,\'94 he said to Aunt\
      Ann. \'93They tell me there\'92s no chance of their getting married for\
      years. This young Bosinney\'94 (he made the word a dactyl in\
      opposition to general usage of a short o) \'93has got nothing. When\
      Winifred married Dartie, I made him bring every penny into\
      settlement\'97lucky thing, too\'97they\'92d ha\'92 had nothing by this time!\'94\
\
      Aunt Ann looked up from her velvet chair. Grey curls banded her\
      forehead, curls that, unchanged for decades, had extinguished in\
      the family all sense of time. She made no reply, for she rarely\
      spoke, husbanding her aged voice; but to James, uneasy of\
      conscience, her look was as good as an answer.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said, \'93I couldn\'92t help Irene\'92s having no money. Soames\
      was in such a hurry; he got quite thin dancing attendance on\
      her.\'94\
\
      Putting the bowl pettishly down on the piano, he let his eyes\
      wander to the group by the door.\
\
      \'93It\'92s my opinion,\'94 he said unexpectedly, \'93that it\'92s just as well\
      as it is.\'94\
\
      Aunt Ann did not ask him to explain this strange utterance. She\
      knew what he was thinking. If Irene had no money she would not be\
      so foolish as to do anything wrong; for they said\'97they said\'97she\
      had been asking for a separate room; but, of course, Soames had\
      not....\
\
      James interrupted her reverie:\
\
      \'93But where,\'94 he asked, \'93was Timothy? Hadn\'92t he come with them?\'94\
\
      Through Aunt Ann\'92s compressed lips a tender smile forced its way:\
\
      \'93No, he didn\'92t think it wise, with so much of this diphtheria\
      about; and he so liable to take things.\'94\
\
      James answered:\
\
      \'93Well, _he_ takes good care of himself. I can\'92t afford to take\
      the care of myself that he does.\'94\
\
      Nor was it easy to say which, of admiration, envy, or contempt,\
      was dominant in that remark.\
\
      Timothy, indeed, was seldom seen. The baby of the family, a\
      publisher by profession, he had some years before, when business\
      was at full tide, scented out the stagnation which, indeed, had\
      not yet come, but which ultimately, as all agreed, was bound to\
      set in, and, selling his share in a firm engaged mainly in the\
      production of religious books, had invested the quite conspicuous\
      proceeds in three per cent. consols. By this act he had at once\
      assumed an isolated position, no other Forsyte being content with\
      less than four per cent. for his money; and this isolation had\
      slowly and surely undermined a spirit perhaps better than\
      commonly endowed with caution. He had become almost a myth\'97a kind\
      of incarnation of security haunting the background of the Forsyte\
      universe. He had never committed the imprudence of marrying, or\
      encumbering himself in any way with children.\
\
      James resumed, tapping the piece of china:\
\
      \'93This isn\'92t real old Worcester. I s\'92pose Jolyon\'92s told you\
      something about the young man. From all _I_ can learn, he\'92s got\
      no business, no income, and no connection worth speaking of; but\
      then, I know nothing\'97nobody tells me anything.\'94\
\
      Aunt Ann shook her head. Over her square-chinned, aquiline old\
      face a trembling passed; the spidery fingers of her hands pressed\
      against each other and interlaced, as though she were subtly\
      recharging her will.\
\
      The eldest by some years of all the Forsytes, she held a peculiar\
      position amongst them. Opportunists and egotists one and\
      all\'97though not, indeed, more so than their neighbours\'97they\
      quailed before her incorruptible figure, and, when opportunities\
      were too strong, what could they do but avoid her!\
\
      Twisting his long, thin legs, James went on:\
\
      \'93Jolyon, he will have his own way. He\'92s got no children\'94\'97and\
      stopped, recollecting the continued existence of old Jolyon\'92s\
      son, young Jolyon, Jun\'92s father, who had made such a mess of it,\
      and done for himself by deserting his wife and child and running\
      away with that foreign governess. \'93Well,\'94 he resumed hastily, \'93if\
      he likes to do these things, I s\'92pose he can afford to. Now,\
      what\'92s he going to give her? I s\'92pose he\'92ll give her a thousand a\
      year; he\'92s got nobody else to leave his money to.\'94\
\
      He stretched out his hand to meet that of a dapper, clean-shaven\
      man, with hardly a hair on his head, a long, broken nose, full\
      lips, and cold grey eyes under rectangular brows.\
\
      \'93Well, Nick,\'94 he muttered, \'93how are you?\'94\
\
      Nicholas Forsyte, with his bird-like rapidity and the look of a\
      preternaturally sage schoolboy (he had made a large fortune,\
      quite legitimately, out of the companies of which he was a\
      director), placed within that cold palm the tips of his still\
      colder fingers and hastily withdrew them.\
\
      \'93I\'92m bad,\'94 he said, pouting\'97\'93been bad all the week; don\'92t sleep\
      at night. The doctor can\'92t tell why. He\'92s a clever fellow, or I\
      shouldn\'92t have him, but I get nothing out of him but bills.\'94\
\
      \'93Doctors!\'94 said James, coming down sharp on his words: \'93_I\'92ve_\
      had all the doctors in London for one or another of us. There\'92s\
      no satisfaction to be got out of _them;_ they\'92ll tell you\
      anything. There\'92s Swithin, now. What good have they done him?\
      There he is; he\'92s bigger than ever; he\'92s enormous; they can\'92t get\
      his weight down. Look at him!\'94\
\
      Swithin Forsyte, tall, square, and broad, with a chest like a\
      pouter pigeon\'92s in its plumage of bright waistcoats, came\
      strutting towards them.\
\
      \'93Er\'97how are you?\'94 he said in his dandified way, aspirating the\
      \'93h\'94 strongly (this difficult letter was almost absolutely safe in\
      his keeping)\'97\'93how are you?\'94\
\
      Each brother wore an air of aggravation as he looked at the other\
      two, knowing by experience that they would try to eclipse his\
      ailments.\
\
      \'93We were just saying,\'94 said James, \'93that you don\'92t get any\
      thinner.\'94\
\
      Swithin protruded his pale round eyes with the effort of hearing.\
\
      \'93Thinner? I\'92m in good case,\'94 he said, leaning a little forward,\
      \'93not one of your thread-papers like you!\'94\
\
      But, afraid of losing the expansion of his chest, he leaned back\
      again into a state of immobility, for he prized nothing so highly\
      as a distinguished appearance.\
\
      Aunt Ann turned her old eyes from one to the other. Indulgent and\
      severe was her look. In turn the three brothers looked at Ann.\
      She was getting shaky. Wonderful woman! Eighty-six if a day;\
      might live another ten years, and had never been strong. Swithin\
      and James, the twins, were only seventy-five, Nicholas a mere\
      baby of seventy or so. All were strong, and the inference was\
      comforting. Of all forms of property their respective healths\
      naturally concerned them most.\
\
      \'93I\'92m very well in myself,\'94 proceeded James, \'93but my nerves are\
      out of order. The least thing worries me to death. I shall have\
      to go to Bath.\'94\
\
      \'93Bath!\'94 said Nicholas. \'93I\'92ve tried Harrogate. _That\'92s_ no good.\
      What I want is sea air. There\'92s nothing like Yarmouth. Now, when\
      I go there I sleep....\'94\
\
      \'93My liver\'92s very bad,\'94 interrupted Swithin slowly. \'93Dreadful pain\
      here;\'94 and he placed his hand on his right side.\
\
      \'93Want of exercise,\'94 muttered James, his eyes on the china. He\
      quickly added: \'93I get a pain there, too.\'94\
\
      Swithin reddened, a resemblance to a turkey-cock coming upon his\
      old face.\
\
      \'93Exercise!\'94 he said. \'93I take plenty: I never use the lift at the\
      Club.\'94\
\
      \'93I didn\'92t know,\'94 James hurried out. \'93I know nothing about\
      anybody; nobody tells me anything....\'94\
\
      Swithin fixed him with a stare:\
\
      \'93What do you do for a pain there?\'94\
\
      James brightened.\
\
      \'93I take a compound....\'94\
\
      \'93How are you, uncle?\'94\
\
      June stood before him, her resolute small face raised from her\
      little height to his great height, and her hand outheld.\
\
      The brightness faded from James\'92s visage.\
\
      \'93How are you?\'94 he said, brooding over her. \'93So you\'92re going to\
      Wales to-morrow to visit your young man\'92s aunts? You\'92ll have a\
      lot of rain there. This isn\'92t real old Worcester.\'94 He tapped the\
      bowl. \'93Now, that set I gave your mother when she married was the\
      genuine thing.\'94\
\
      June shook hands one by one with her three great-uncles, and\
      turned to Aunt Ann. A very sweet look had come into the old\
      lady\'92s face, she kissed the girl\'92s check with trembling fervour.\
\
      \'93Well, my dear,\'94 she said, \'93and so you\'92re going for a whole\
      month!\'94\
\
      The girl passed on, and Aunt Ann looked after her slim little\
      figure. The old lady\'92s round, steel grey eyes, over which a film\
      like a bird\'92s was beginning to come, followed her wistfully\
      amongst the bustling crowd, for people were beginning to say\
      good-bye; and her finger-tips, pressing and pressing against each\
      other, were busy again with the recharging of her will against\
      that inevitable ultimate departure of her own.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 she thought, \'93everybody\'92s been most kind; quite a lot of\
      people come to congratulate her. She ought to be very happy.\'94\
      Amongst the throng of people by the door, the well-dressed throng\
      drawn from the families of lawyers and doctors, from the Stock\
      Exchange, and all the innumerable avocations of the upper-middle\
      class\'97there were only some twenty percent of Forsytes; but to\
      Aunt Ann they seemed all Forsytes\'97and certainly there was not\
      much difference\'97she saw only her own flesh and blood. It was her\
      world, this family, and she knew no other, had never perhaps\
      known any other. All their little secrets, illnesses,\
      engagements, and marriages, how they were getting on, and whether\
      they were making money\'97all this was her property, her delight,\
      her life; beyond this only a vague, shadowy mist of facts and\
      persons of no real significance. This it was that she would have\
      to lay down when it came to her turn to die; this which gave to\
      her that importance, that secret self-importance, without which\
      none of us can bear to live; and to this she clung wistfully,\
      with a greed that grew each day! If life were slipping away from\
      her, _this_ she would retain to the end.\
\
      She thought of Jun\'92s father, young Jolyon, who had run away with\
      that foreign girl. And what a sad blow to his father and to them\
      all. Such a promising young fellow! A sad blow, though there had\
      been no public scandal, most fortunately, Jo\'92s wife seeking for\
      no divorce! A long time ago! And when Jun\'92s mother died, six\
      years ago, Jo had married that woman, and they had two children\
      now, so she had heard. Still, he had forfeited his right to be\
      there, had cheated her of the complete fulfilment of her family\
      pride, deprived her of the rightful pleasure of seeing and\
      kissing him of whom she had been so proud, such a promising young\
      fellow! The thought rankled with the bitterness of a\
      long-inflicted injury in her tenacious old heart. A little water\
      stood in her eyes. With a handkerchief of the finest lawn she\
      wiped them stealthily.\
\
      \'93Well, Aunt Ann?\'94 said a voice behind.\
\
      Soames Forsyte, flat-shouldered, clean-shaven, flat-cheeked,\
      flat-waisted, yet with something round and secret about his whole\
      appearance, looked downwards and aslant at Aunt Ann, as though\
      trying to see through the side of his own nose.\
\
      \'93And what do you think of the engagement?\'94 he asked.\
\
      Aunt Ann\'92s eyes rested on him proudly; of all the nephews since\
      young Jolyon\'92s departure from the family nest, he was now her\
      favourite, for she recognised in him a sure trustee of the family\
      soul that must so soon slip beyond her keeping.\
\
      \'93Very nice for the young man,\'94 she said; \'93and he\'92s a good-looking\
      young fellow; but I doubt if he\'92s quite the right lover for dear\
      June.\'94\
\
      Soames touched the edge of a gold-lacquered lustre.\
\
      \'93She\'92ll tame him,\'94 he said, stealthily wetting his finger and\
      rubbing it on the knobby bulbs. \'93That\'92s genuine old lacquer; you\
      can\'92t get it nowadays. It\'92d do well in a sale at Jobson\'92s.\'94 He\
      spoke with relish, as though he felt that he was cheering up his\
      old aunt. It was seldom he was so confidential. \'93I wouldn\'92t mind\
      having it myself,\'94 he added; \'93you can always get your price for\
      old lacquer.\'94\
\
      \'93You\'92re so clever with all those things,\'94 said Aunt Ann. \'93And how\
      is dear Irene?\'94\
\
      Soames\'92s smile died.\
\
      \'93Pretty well,\'94 he said. \'93Complains she can\'92t sleep; she sleeps a\
      great deal better than I do,\'94 and he looked at his wife, who was\
      talking to Bosinney by the door.\
\
      Aunt Ann sighed.\
\
      \'93Perhaps,\'94 she said, \'93it will be just as well for her not to see\
      so much of June. She\'92s such a decided character, dear June!\'94\
\
      Soames flushed; his flushes passed rapidly over his flat cheeks\
      and centered between his eyes, where they remained, the stamp of\
      disturbing thoughts.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know what she sees in that little flibbertigibbet,\'94 he\
      burst out, but noticing that they were no longer alone, he turned\
      and again began examining the lustre.\
\
      \'93They tell me Jolyon\'92s bought another house,\'94 said his father\'92s\
      voice close by; \'93he must have a lot of money\'97he must have more\
      money than he knows what to do with! Montpellier Square, they\
      say; close to Soames! They never told me, Irene never tells me\
      anything!\'94\
\
      \'93Capital position, not two minutes from me,\'94 said the voice of\
      Swithin, \'93and from my rooms I can drive to the Club in eight.\'94\
\
      The position of their houses was of vital importance to the\
      Forsytes, nor was this remarkable, since the whole spirit of\
      their success was embodied therein.\
\
      Their father, of farming stock, had come from Dorsetshire near\
      the beginning of the century.\
\
      \'93Superior Dosset Forsyte,\'94 as he was called by his intimates, had\
      been a stonemason by trade, and risen to the position of a\
      master-builder.\
\
      Towards the end of his life he moved to London, where, building\
      on until he died, he was buried at Highgate. He left over thirty\
      thousand pounds between his ten children. Old Jolyon alluded to\
      him, if at all, as \'93A hard, thick sort of man; not much\
      refinement about him.\'94 The second generation of Forsytes felt\
      indeed that he was not greatly to their credit. The only\
      aristocratic trait they could find in his character was a habit\
      of drinking Madeira.\
\
      Aunt Hester, an authority on family history, described him thus:\
      \'93I don\'92t recollect that he ever did anything; at least, not in my\
      time. He was er\'97an owner of houses, my dear. His hair about your\
      Uncle Swithin\'92s colour; rather a square build. Tall? No\'97not very\
      tall\'94 (he had been five feet five, with a mottled face); \'93a\
      fresh-coloured man. I remember he used to drink Madeira; but ask\
      your Aunt Ann. What was _his_ father? He\'97er\'97had to do with the\
      land down in Dorsetshire, by the sea.\'94\
\
      James once went down to see for himself what sort of place this\
      was that they had come from. He found two old farms, with a cart\
      track rutted into the pink earth, leading down to a mill by the\
      beach; a little grey church with a buttressed outer wall, and a\
      smaller and greyer chapel. The stream which worked the mill came\
      bubbling down in a dozen rivulets, and pigs were hunting round\
      that estuary. A haze hovered over the prospect. Down this hollow,\
      with their feet deep in the mud and their faces towards the sea,\
      it appeared that the primeval Forsytes had been content to walk\
      Sunday after Sunday for hundreds of years.\
\
      Whether or no James had cherished hopes of an inheritance, or of\
      something rather distinguished to be found down there, he came\
      back to town in a poor way, and went about with a pathetic\
      attempt at making the best of a bad job.\
\
      \'93There\'92s very little to be had out of that,\'94 he said; \'93regular\
      country little place, old as the hills....\'94\
\
      Its age was felt to be a comfort. Old Jolyon, in whom a desperate\
      honesty welled up at times, would allude to his ancestors as:\
      \'93Yeomen\'97I suppose very small beer.\'94 Yet he would repeat the word\
      \'93yeomen\'94 as if it afforded him consolation.\
\
      They had all done so well for themselves, these Forsytes, that\
      they were all what is called \'93of a certain position.\'94 They had\
      shares in all sorts of things, not as yet\'97with the exception of\
      Timothy\'97in consols, for they had no dread in life like that of 3\
      per cent. for their money. They collected pictures, too, and were\
      supporters of such charitable institutions as might be beneficial\
      to their sick domestics. From their father, the builder, they\
      inherited a talent for bricks and mortar. Originally, perhaps,\
      members of some primitive sect, they were now in the natural\
      course of things members of the Church of England, and caused\
      their wives and children to attend with some regularity the more\
      fashionable churches of the Metropolis. To have doubted their\
      Christianity would have caused them both pain and surprise. Some\
      of them paid for pews, thus expressing in the most practical form\
      their sympathy with the teachings of Christ.\
\
      Their residences, placed at stated intervals round the park,\
      watched like sentinels, lest the fair heart of this London, where\
      their desires were fixed, should slip from their clutches, and\
      leave them lower in their own estimations.\
\
      There was old Jolyon in Stanhope Place; the Jameses in Park Lane;\
      Swithin in the lonely glory of orange and blue chambers in Hyde\
      Park Mansions\'97he had never married, not he\'97the Soamses in their\
      nest off Knightsbridge; the Rogers in Prince\'92s Gardens (Roger was\
      that remarkable Forsyte who had conceived and carried out the\
      notion of bringing up his four sons to a new profession. \'93Collect\
      house property, nothing like it,\'94 he would say; \'93_I_ never did\
      anything else\'94).\
\
      The Haymans again\'97Mrs. Hayman was the one married Forsyte\
      sister\'97in a house high up on Campden Hill, shaped like a giraffe,\
      and so tall that it gave the observer a crick in the neck; the\
      Nicholases in Ladbroke Grove, a spacious abode and a great\
      bargain; and last, but not least, Timothy\'92s on the Bayswater\
      Road, where Ann, and Juley, and Hester, lived under his\
      protection.\
\
      But all this time James was musing, and now he inquired of his\
      host and brother what he had given for that house in Montpellier\
      Square. He himself had had his eye on a house there for the last\
      two years, but they wanted such a price.\
\
      Old Jolyon recounted the details of his purchase.\
\
      \'93Twenty-two years to run?\'94 repeated James; \'93The very house I was\
      after\'97you\'92ve given too much for it!\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon frowned.\
\
      \'93It\'92s not that I want it,\'94 said James hastily; \'93it wouldn\'92t suit\
      my purpose at that price. Soames knows the house, well\'97he\'92ll tell\
      you it\'92s too dear\'97his opinion\'92s worth having.\'94\
\
      \'93I don\'92t,\'94 said old Jolyon, \'93care a fig for his opinion.\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 murmured James, \'93you _will_ have your own way\'97it\'92s a good\
      opinion. Good-bye! We\'92re going to drive down to Hurlingham. They\
      tell me Jun\'92s going to Wales. You\'92ll be lonely tomorrow. What\'92ll\
      you do with yourself? You\'92d better come and dine with us!\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon refused. He went down to the front door and saw them\
      into their barouche, and twinkled at them, having already\
      forgotten his spleen\'97Mrs. James facing the horses, tall and\
      majestic with auburn hair; on her left, Irene\'97the two husbands,\
      father and son, sitting forward, as though they expected\
      something, opposite their wives. Bobbing and bounding upon the\
      spring cushions, silent, swaying to each motion of their chariot,\
      old Jolyon watched them drive away under the sunlight.\
\
      During the drive the silence was broken by Mrs. James.\
\
      \'93Did you ever see such a collection of rumty-too people?\'94\
\
      Soames, glancing at her beneath his eyelids, nodded, and he saw\
      Irene steal at him one of her unfathomable looks. It is likely\
      enough that each branch of the Forsyte family made that remark as\
      they drove away from old Jolyon\'92s \'93At Home!\'94\
\
      Amongst the last of the departing guests the fourth and fifth\
      brothers, Nicholas and Roger, walked away together, directing\
      their steps alongside Hyde Park towards the Praed Street Station\
      of the Underground. Like all other Forsytes of a certain age they\
      kept carriages of their own, and never took cabs if by any means\
      they could avoid it.\
\
      The day was bright, the trees of the Park in the full beauty of\
      mid-June foliage; the brothers did not seem to notice phenomena,\
      which contributed, nevertheless, to the jauntiness of promenade\
      and conversation.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Roger, \'93she\'92s a good-lookin\'92 woman, that wife of\
      Soames\'92. I\'92m told they don\'92t get on.\'94\
\
      This brother had a high forehead, and the freshest colour of any\
      of the Forsytes; his light grey eyes measured the street frontage\
      of the houses by the way, and now and then he would level his,\
      umbrella and take a \'93lunar,\'94 as he expressed it, of the varying\
      heights.\
\
      \'93She\'92d no money,\'94 replied Nicholas.\
\
      He himself had married a good deal of money, of which, it being\
      then the golden age before the Married Women\'92s Property Act, he\
      had mercifully been enabled to make a successful use.\
\
      \'93What was her father?\'94\
\
      \'93Heron was his name, a Professor, so they tell me.\'94\
\
      Roger shook his head.\
\
      \'93There\'92s no money in that,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93They say her mother\'92s father was cement.\'94\
\
      Roger\'92s face brightened.\
\
      \'93But he went bankrupt,\'94 went on Nicholas.\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 exclaimed Roger, \'93Soames will have trouble with her; you\
      mark my words, he\'92ll have trouble\'97she\'92s got a foreign look.\'94\
\
      Nicholas licked his lips.\
\
      \'93She\'92s a pretty woman,\'94 and he waved aside a crossing-sweeper.\
\
      \'93How did he get hold of her?\'94 asked Roger presently. \'93She must\
      cost him a pretty penny in dress!\'94\
\
      \'93Ann tells me,\'94 replied Nicholas, \'93he was half-cracked about her.\
      She refused him five times. James, he\'92s nervous about it, I can\
      see.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 said Roger again; \'93I\'92m sorry for James; he had trouble with\
      Dartie.\'94 His pleasant colour was heightened by exercise, he swung\
      his umbrella to the level of his eye more frequently than ever.\
      Nicholas\'92s face also wore a pleasant look.\
\
      \'93Too pale for me,\'94 he said, \'93but her figures capital!\'94\
\
      Roger made no reply.\
\
      \'93I call her distinguished-looking,\'94 he said at last\'97it was the\
      highest praise in the Forsyte vocabulary. \'93That young Bosinney\
      will never do any good for himself. They say at Burkitt\'92s he\'92s\
      one of these artistic chaps\'97got an idea of improving English\
      architecture; there\'92s no money in that! I should like to hear\
      what Timothy would say to it.\'94\
\
      They entered the station.\
\
      \'93What class are you going? I go second.\'94\
\
      \'93No second for me,\'94 said Nicholas;\'97\'93you never know what you may\
      catch.\'94\
\
      He took a first-class ticket to Notting Hill Gate; Roger a second\
      to South Kensington. The train coming in a minute later, the two\
      brothers parted and entered their respective compartments. Each\
      felt aggrieved that the other had not modified his habits to\
      secure his society a little longer; but as Roger voiced it in his\
      thoughts:\
\
      \'93Always a stubborn beggar, Nick!\'94\
\
      And as Nicholas expressed it to himself:\
\
      \'93Cantankerous chap Roger\'97always was!\'94\
\
      There was little sentimentality about the Forsytes. In that great\
      London, which they had conquered and become merged in, what time\
      had they to be sentimental?\
\
\
      CHAPTER II OLD JOLYON GOES TO THE OPERA\
\
      At five o\'92clock the following day old Jolyon sat alone, a cigar\
      between his lips, and on a table by his side a cup of tea. He was\
      tired, and before he had finished his cigar he fell asleep. A fly\
      settled on his hair, his breathing sounded heavy in the drowsy\
      silence, his upper lip under the white moustache puffed in and\
      out. From between the fingers of his veined and wrinkled hand the\
      cigar, dropping on the empty hearth, burned itself out.\
\
      The gloomy little study, with windows of stained glass to exclude\
      the view, was full of dark green velvet and heavily-carved\
      mahogany\'97a suite of which old Jolyon was wont to say: \'93Shouldn\'92t\
      wonder if it made a big price some day!\'94\
\
      It was pleasant to think that in the after life he could get more\
      for things than he had given.\
\
      In the rich brown atmosphere peculiar to back rooms in the\
      mansion of a Forsyte, the Rembrandtesque effect of his great\
      head, with its white hair, against the cushion of his high-backed\
      seat, was spoiled by the moustache, which imparted a somewhat\
      military look to his face. An old clock that had been with him\
      since before his marriage forty years ago kept with its ticking a\
      jealous record of the seconds slipping away forever from its old\
      master.\
\
      He had never cared for this room, hardly going into it from one\
      year\'92s end to another, except to take cigars from the Japanese\
      cabinet in the corner, and the room now had its revenge.\
\
      His temples, curving like thatches over the hollows beneath, his\
      cheek-bones and chin, all were sharpened in his sleep, and there\
      had come upon his face the confession that he was an old man.\
\
      He woke. June had gone! James had said he would be lonely. James\
      had always been a poor thing. He recollected with satisfaction\
      that he had bought that house over James\'92s head.\
\
      Serve him right for sticking at the price; the only thing the\
      fellow thought of was money. Had he given too much, though? It\
      wanted a lot of doing to\'97He dared say he would want all his money\
      before he had done with this affair of Jun\'92s. He ought never to\
      have allowed the engagement. She had met this Bosinney at the\
      house of Baynes, Baynes and Bildeboy, the architects. He believed\
      that Baynes, whom he knew\'97a bit of an old woman\'97was the young\
      man\'92s uncle by marriage. After that she\'92d been always running\
      after him; and when she took a thing into her head there was no\
      stopping her. She was continually taking up with \'93lame ducks\'94 of\
      one sort or another. This fellow had no money, but she must needs\
      become engaged to him\'97a harumscarum, unpractical chap, who would\
      get himself into no end of difficulties.\
\
      She had come to him one day in her slap-dash way and told him;\
      and, as if it were any consolation, she had added:\
\
      \'93He\'92s so splendid; he\'92s often lived on cocoa for a week!\'94\
\
      \'93And he wants you to live on cocoa too?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh no; he is getting into the swim now.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon had taken his cigar from under his white moustaches,\
      stained by coffee at the edge, and looked at her, that little\
      slip of a thing who had got such a grip of his heart. He knew\
      more about \'93swims\'94 than his granddaughter. But she, having\
      clasped her hands on his knees, rubbed her chin against him,\
      making a sound like a purring cat. And, knocking the ash off his\
      cigar, he had exploded in nervous desperation:\
\
      \'93You\'92re all alike: you won\'92t be satisfied till you\'92ve got what\
      you want. If you must come to grief, you must; _I_ wash my hands\
      of it.\'94\
\
      So, he had washed his hands of it, making the condition that they\
      should not marry until Bosinney had at least four hundred a year.\
\
      \'93_I_ shan\'92t be able to give you very much,\'94 he had said, a\
      formula to which June was not unaccustomed. \'93Perhaps this\
      What\'92s-his-name will provide the cocoa.\'94\
\
      He had hardly seen anything of her since it began. A bad\
      business! He had no notion of giving her a lot of money to enable\
      a fellow he knew nothing about to live on in idleness. He had\
      seen that sort of thing before; no good ever came of it. Worst of\
      all, he had no hope of shaking her resolution; she was as\
      obstinate as a mule, always had been from a child. He didn\'92t see\
      where it was to end. They must cut their coat according to their\
      cloth. He would not give way till he saw young Bosinney with an\
      income of his own. That June would have trouble with the fellow\
      was as plain as a pikestaff; he had no more idea of money than a\
      cow. As to this rushing down to Wales to visit the young man\'92s\
      aunts, he fully expected they were old cats.\
\
      And, motionless, old Jolyon stared at the wall; but for his open\
      eyes, he might have been asleep.... The idea of supposing that\
      young cub Soames could give him advice! He had always been a cub,\
      with his nose in the air! He would be setting up as a man of\
      property next, with a place in the country! A man of property!\
      H\'92mph! Like his father, he was always nosing out bargains, a\
      cold-blooded young beggar!\
\
      He rose, and, going to the cabinet, began methodically stocking\
      his cigar-case from a bundle fresh in. They were not bad at the\
      price, but you couldn\'92t get a good cigar, nowadays, nothing to\
      hold a candle to those old Superfinos of Hanson and Bridger\'92s.\
      _That_ was a cigar!\
\
      The thought, like some stealing perfume, carried him back to\
      those wonderful nights at Richmond when after dinner he sat\
      smoking on the terrace of the Crown and Sceptre with Nicholas\
      Treffry and Traquair and Jack Herring and Anthony Thornworthy.\
      How good his cigars were then! Poor old Nick!\'97dead, and Jack\
      Herring\'97dead, and Traquair\'97dead of that wife of his, and\
      Thornworthy\'97awfully shaky (no wonder, with his appetite).\
\
      Of all the company of those days he himself alone seemed left,\
      except Swithin, of course, and he so outrageously big there was\
      no doing anything with him.\
\
      Difficult to believe it was so long ago; he felt young still! Of\
      all his thoughts, as he stood there counting his cigars, this was\
      the most poignant, the most bitter. With his white head and his\
      loneliness he had remained young and green at heart. And those\
      Sunday afternoons on Hampstead Heath, when young Jolyon and he\
      went for a stretch along the Spaniard\'92s Road to Highgate, to\
      Child\'92s Hill, and back over the Heath again to dine at Jack\
      Straw\'92s Castle\'97how delicious his cigars were then! And such\
      weather! There was no weather now.\
\
      When June was a toddler of five, and every other Sunday he took\
      her to the Zoo, away from the society of those two good women,\
      her mother and her grandmother, and at the top of the bear den\
      baited his umbrella with buns for her favourite bears, how sweet\
      his cigars were then!\
\
      Cigars! He had not even succeeded in out-living his palate\'97the\
      famous palate that in the fifties men swore by, and speaking of\
      him, said: \'93Forsyte\'92s the best palate in London!\'94 The palate that\
      in a sense had made his fortune\'97the fortune of the celebrated tea\
      men, Forsyte and Treffry, whose tea, like no other man\'92s tea, had\
      a romantic aroma, the charm of a quite singular genuineness.\
      About the house of Forsyte and Treffry in the City had clung an\
      air of enterprise and mystery, of special dealings in special\
      ships, at special ports, with special Orientals.\
\
      He had worked at that business! Men did work in those days! these\
      young pups hardly knew the meaning of the word. He had gone into\
      every detail, known everything that went on, sometimes sat up all\
      night over it. And he had always chosen his agents himself,\
      prided himself on it. His eye for men, he used to say, had been\
      the secret of his success, and the exercise of this masterful\
      power of selection had been the only part of it all that he had\
      really liked. Not a career for a man of his ability. Even now,\
      when the business had been turned into a Limited Liability\
      Company, and was declining (he had got out of his shares long\
      ago), he felt a sharp chagrin in thinking of that time. How much\
      better he might have done! He would have succeeded splendidly at\
      the Bar! He had even thought of standing for Parliament. How\
      often had not Nicholas Treffry said to him:\
\
      \'93You could do anything, Jo, if you weren\'92t so d-damned careful of\
      yourself!\'94 Dear old Nick! Such a good fellow, but a racketty\
      chap! The notorious Treffry! _He_ had never taken any care of\
      himself. So he was dead. Old Jolyon counted his cigars with a\
      steady hand, and it came into his mind to wonder if perhaps he\
      had been _too_ careful of himself.\
\
      He put the cigar-case in the breast of his coat, buttoned it in,\
      and walked up the long flights to his bedroom, leaning on one\
      foot and the other, and helping himself by the bannister. The\
      house was too big. After June was married, if she ever did marry\
      this fellow, as he supposed she would, he would let it and go\
      into rooms. What was the use of keeping half a dozen servants\
      eating their heads off?\
\
      The butler came to the ring of his bell\'97a large man with a beard,\
      a soft tread, and a peculiar capacity for silence. Old Jolyon\
      told him to put his dress clothes out; he was going to dine at\
      the Club.\
\
      How long had the carriage been back from taking Miss June to the\
      station? Since two? Then let him come round at half-past six!\
\
      The Club which old Jolyon entered on the stroke of seven was one\
      of those political institutions of the upper middle class which\
      have seen better days. In spite of being talked about, perhaps in\
      consequence of being talked about, it betrayed a disappointing\
      vitality. People had grown tired of saying that the \'93Disunion\'94\
      was on its last legs. Old Jolyon would say it, too, yet\
      disregarded the fact in a manner truly irritating to\
      well-constituted Clubmen.\
\
      \'93Why do you keep your name on?\'94 Swithin often asked him with\
      profound vexation. \'93Why don\'92t you join the \'91Polyglot\'92. You can\'92t\
      get a wine like our Heidsieck under twenty shillin\'92 a bottle\
      anywhere in London;\'94 and, dropping his voice, he added: \'93There\'92s\
      only five hundred dozen left. I drink it every night of my life.\'94\
\
      \'93I\'92ll think of it,\'94 old Jolyon would answer; but when he did\
      think of it there was always the question of fifty guineas\
      entrance fee, and it would take him four or five years to get in.\
      He continued to think of it.\
\
      He was too old to be a Liberal, had long ceased to believe in the\
      political doctrines of his Club, had even been known to allude to\
      them as \'93wretched stuff,\'94 and it afforded him pleasure to\
      continue a member in the teeth of principles so opposed to his\
      own. He had always had a contempt for the place, having joined it\
      many years ago when they refused to have him at the \'93Hotch Potch\'94\
      owing to his being \'93in trade.\'94 As if he were not as good as any\
      of them! He naturally despised the Club that _did_ take him. The\
      members were a poor lot, many of them in the City\'97stockbrokers,\
      solicitors, auctioneers\'97what not! Like most men of strong\
      character but not too much originality, old Jolyon set small\
      store by the class to which he belonged. Faithfully he followed\
      their customs, social and otherwise, and secretly he thought them\
      \'93a common lot.\'94\
\
      Years and philosophy, of which he had his share, had dimmed the\
      recollection of his defeat at the \'93Hotch Potch\'94. and now in his\
      thoughts it was enshrined as the Queen of Clubs. He would have\
      been a member all these years himself, but, owing to the slipshod\
      way his proposer, Jack Herring, had gone to work, they had not\
      known what they were doing in keeping him out. Why! they had\
      taken his son Jo at once, and he believed the boy was still a\
      member; he had received a letter dated from there eight years\
      ago.\
\
      He had not been near the \'93Disunion\'94 for months, and the house had\
      undergone the piebald decoration which people bestow on old\
      houses and old ships when anxious to sell them.\
\
      \'93Beastly colour, the smoking-room!\'94 he thought. \'93The dining-room\
      is good!\'94\
\
      Its gloomy chocolate, picked out with light green, took his\
      fancy.\
\
      He ordered dinner, and sat down in the very corner, at the very\
      table perhaps! (things did not progress much at the \'93Disunion,\'94 a\
      Club of almost Radical principles) at which he and young Jolyon\
      used to sit twenty-five years ago, when he was taking the latter\
      to Drury Lane, during his holidays.\
\
      The boy had loved the theatre, and old Jolyon recalled how he\
      used to sit opposite, concealing his excitement under a careful\
      but transparent nonchalance.\
\
      He ordered himself, too, the very dinner the boy had always\
      chosen\'97soup, whitebait, cutlets, and a tart. Ah! if he were only\
      opposite now!\
\
      The two had not met for fourteen years. And not for the first\
      time during those fourteen years old Jolyon wondered whether he\
      had been a little to blame in the matter of his son. An\
      unfortunate love-affair with that precious flirt Danae\
      Thornworthy (now Danae Pellew), Anthony Thornworthy\'92s daughter,\
      had thrown him on the rebound into the arms of Jun\'92s mother. He\
      ought perhaps to have put a spoke in the wheel of their marriage;\
      they were too young; but after that experience of Jo\'92s\
      susceptibility he had been only too anxious to see him married.\
      And in four years the crash had come! To have approved his son\'92s\
      conduct in that crash was, of course, impossible; reason and\
      training\'97that combination of potent factors which stood for his\
      principles\'97told him of this impossibility, and his heart cried\
      out. The grim remorselessness of that business had no pity for\
      hearts. There was June, the atom with flaming hair, who had\
      climbed all over him, twined and twisted herself about him\'97about\
      his heart that was made to be the plaything and beloved resort of\
      tiny, helpless things. With characteristic insight he saw he must\
      part with one or with the other; no half-measures could serve in\
      such a situation. In that lay its tragedy. And the tiny, helpless\
      thing prevailed. He would not run with the hare and hunt with the\
      hounds, and so to his son he said good-bye.\
\
      That good-bye had lasted until now.\
\
      He had proposed to continue a reduced allowance to young Jolyon,\
      but this had been refused, and perhaps that refusal had hurt him\
      more than anything, for with it had gone the last outlet of his\
      penned-in affection; and there had come such tangible and solid\
      proof of rupture as only a transaction in property, a bestowal or\
      refusal of such, could supply.\
\
      His dinner tasted flat. His pint of champagne was dry and bitter\
      stuff, not like the Veuve Clicquots of old days.\
\
      Over his cup of coffee, he bethought him that he would go to the\
      opera. In the _Times_, therefore\'97he had a distrust of other\
      papers\'97he read the announcement for the evening. It was\
      \'93Fidelio.\'94\
\
      Mercifully not one of those new-fangled German pantomimes by that\
      fellow Wagner.\
\
      Putting on his ancient opera hat, which, with its brim flattened\
      by use, and huge capacity, looked like an emblem of greater days,\
      and, pulling out an old pair of very thin lavender kid gloves\
      smelling strongly of Russia leather, from habitual proximity to\
      the cigar-case in the pocket of his overcoat, he stepped into a\
      hansom.\
\
      The cab rattled gaily along the streets, and old Jolyon was\
      struck by their unwonted animation.\
\
      \'93The hotels must be doing a tremendous business,\'94 he thought. A\
      few years ago there had been none of these big hotels. He made a\
      satisfactory reflection on some property he had in the\
      neighbourhood. It must be going up in value by leaps and bounds!\
      What traffic!\
\
      But from that he began indulging in one of those strange\
      impersonal speculations, so uncharacteristic of a Forsyte,\
      wherein lay, in part, the secret of his supremacy amongst them.\
      What atoms men were, and what a lot of them! And what would\
      become of them all?\
\
      He stumbled as he got out of the cab, gave the man his exact\
      fare, walked up to the ticket office to take his stall, and stood\
      there with his purse in his hand\'97he always carried his money in a\
      purse, never having approved of that habit of carrying it loosely\
      in the pockets, as so many young men did nowadays. The official\
      leaned out, like an old dog from a kennel.\
\
      \'93Why,\'94 he said in a surprised voice, \'93it\'92s Mr. Jolyon Forsyte! So\
      it is! Haven\'92t seen you, sir, for years. Dear me! Times aren\'92t\
      what they were. Why! you and your brother, and that\
      auctioneer\'97Mr. Traquair, and Mr. Nicholas Treffry\'97you used to\
      have six or seven stalls here regular every season. And how are\
      you, sir? We don\'92t get younger!\'94\
\
      The colour in old Jolyon\'92s eyes deepened; he paid his guinea.\
      They had not forgotten him. He marched in, to the sounds of the\
      overture, like an old war-horse to battle.\
\
      Folding his opera hat, he sat down, drew out his lavender gloves\
      in the old way, and took up his glasses for a long look round the\
      house. Dropping them at last on his folded hat, he fixed his eyes\
      on the curtain. More poignantly than ever he felt that it was all\
      over and done with him. Where were all the women, the pretty\
      women, the house used to be so full of? Where was that old\
      feeling in the heart as he waited for one of those great singers?\
      Where that sensation of the intoxication of life and of his own\
      power to enjoy it all?\
\
      The greatest opera-goer of his day! There was no opera now! That\
      fellow Wagner had ruined everything; no melody left, nor any\
      voices to sing it. Ah! the wonderful singers! Gone! He sat\
      watching the old scenes acted, a numb feeling at his heart.\
\
      From the curl of silver over his ear to the pose of his foot in\
      its elastic-sided patent boot, there was nothing clumsy or weak\
      about old Jolyon. He was as upright\'97very nearly\'97as in those old\
      times when he came every night; his sight was as good\'97almost as\
      good. But what a feeling of weariness and disillusion!\
\
      He had been in the habit all his life of enjoying things, even\
      imperfect things\'97and there had been many imperfect things\'97he had\
      enjoyed them all with moderation, so as to keep himself young.\
      But now he was deserted by his power of enjoyment, by his\
      philosophy, and left with this dreadful feeling that it was all\
      done with. Not even the Prisoners\'92 Chorus, nor Florian\'92s Song,\
      had the power to dispel the gloom of his loneliness.\
\
      If Jo were only with him! The boy must be forty by now. He had\
      wasted fourteen years out of the life of his only son. And Jo was\
      no longer a social pariah. He was married. Old Jolyon had been\
      unable to refrain from marking his appreciation of the action by\
      enclosing his son a cheque for \'a3500. The cheque had been returned\
      in a letter from the \'93Hotch Potch,\'94 couched in these words.\
\
      \'93MY DEAREST FATHER,\
          \'93Your generous gift was welcome as a sign that you might\
          think worse of me. I return it, but should you think fit to\
          invest it for the benefit of the little chap (we call him\
          Jolly), who bears our Christian and, by courtesy, our\
          surname, I shall be very glad.\
          \'93I hope with all my heart that your health is as good as\
          ever.\
\
      \'93Your loving son,\
      \'93JO.\'94\
\
      The letter was like the boy. He had always been an amiable chap.\
      Old Jolyon had sent this reply:\
\
      \'93MY DEAR JO,\
          \'93The sum (\'a3500) stands in my books for the benefit of your\
          boy, under the name of Jolyon Forsyte, and will be\
          duly-credited with interest at 5 per cent. I hope that you\
          are doing well. My health remains good at present.\
\
      \'93With love, I am,\
      \'93Your affectionate Father,\
      \'93JOLYON FORSYTE.\'94\
\
      And every year on the 1st of January he had added a hundred and\
      the interest. The sum was mounting up\'97next New Year\'92s Day it\
      would be fifteen hundred and odd pounds! And it is difficult to\
      say how much satisfaction he had got out of that yearly\
      transaction. But the correspondence had ended.\
\
      In spite of his love for his son, in spite of an instinct, partly\
      constitutional, partly the result, as in thousands of his class,\
      of the continual handling and watching of affairs, prompting him\
      to judge conduct by results rather than by principle, there was\
      at the bottom of his heart a sort of uneasiness. His son ought,\
      under the circumstances, to have gone to the dogs; that law was\
      laid down in all the novels, sermons, and plays he had ever read,\
      heard, or witnessed.\
\
      After receiving the cheque back there seemed to him to be\
      something wrong somewhere. Why had his son not gone to the dogs?\
      But, then, who could tell?\
\
      He had heard, of course\'97in fact, he had made it his business to\
      find out\'97that Jo lived in St. John\'92s Wood, that he had a little\
      house in Wistaria Avenue with a garden, and took his wife about\
      with him into society\'97a queer sort of society, no doubt\'97and that\
      they had two children\'97the little chap they called Jolly\
      (considering the circumstances the name struck him as cynical,\
      and old Jolyon both feared and disliked cynicism), and a girl\
      called Holly, born since the marriage. Who could tell what his\
      son\'92s circumstances really were? He had capitalized the income he\
      had inherited from his mother\'92s father and joined Lloyd\'92s as an\
      underwriter; he painted pictures, too\'97water-colours. Old Jolyon\
      knew this, for he had surreptitiously bought them from time to\
      time, after chancing to see his son\'92s name signed at the bottom\
      of a representation of the river Thames in a dealer\'92s window. He\
      thought them bad, and did not hang them because of the signature;\
      he kept them locked up in a drawer.\
\
      In the great opera-house a terrible yearning came on him to see\
      his son. He remembered the days when he had been wont to slide\
      him, in a brown holland suit, to and fro under the arch of his\
      legs; the times when he ran beside the boy\'92s pony, teaching him\
      to ride; the day he first took him to school. He had been a\
      loving, lovable little chap! After he went to Eton he had\
      acquired, perhaps, a little too much of that desirable manner\
      which old Jolyon knew was only to be obtained at such places and\
      at great expense; but he had always been companionable. Always a\
      companion, even after Cambridge\'97a little far off, perhaps, owing\
      to the advantages he had received. Old Jolyon\'92s feeling towards\
      our public schools and \'92Varsities never wavered, and he retained\
      touchingly his attitude of admiration and mistrust towards a\
      system appropriate to the highest in the land, of which he had\
      not himself been privileged to partake.... Now that June had gone\
      and left, or as good as left him, it would have been a comfort to\
      see his son again. Guilty of this treason to his family, his\
      principles, his class, old Jolyon fixed his eyes on the singer. A\
      poor thing\'97a wretched poor thing! And the Florian a perfect\
      stick!\
\
      It was over. They were easily pleased nowadays!\
\
      In the crowded street he snapped up a cab under the very nose of\
      a stout and much younger gentleman, who had already assumed it to\
      be his own. His route lay through Pall Mall, and at the corner,\
      instead of going through the Green Park, the cabman turned to\
      drive up St. James\'92s Street. Old Jolyon put his hand through the\
      trap (he could not bear being taken out of his way); in turning,\
      however, he found himself opposite the \'93Hotch Potch,\'94 and the\
      yearning that had been secretly with him the whole evening\
      prevailed. He called to the driver to stop. He would go in and\
      ask if Jo still belonged there.\
\
      He went in. The hall looked exactly as it did when he used to\
      dine there with Jack Herring, and they had the best cook in\
      London; and he looked round with the shrewd, straight glance that\
      had caused him all his life to be better served than most men.\
\
      \'93Mr. Jolyon Forsyte still a member here?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, sir; in the Club now, sir. What name?\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon was taken aback.\
\
      \'93His father,\'94 he said.\
\
      And having spoken, he took his stand, back to the fireplace.\
\
      Young Jolyon, on the point of leaving the Club, had put on his\
      hat, and was in the act of crossing the hall, as the porter met\
      him. He was no longer young, with hair going grey, and face\'97a\
      narrower replica of his father\'92s, with the same large drooping\
      moustache\'97decidedly worn. He turned pale. This meeting was\
      terrible after all those years, for nothing in the world was so\
      terrible as a scene. They met and crossed hands without a word.\
      Then, with a quaver in his voice, the father said:\
\
      \'93How are you, my boy?\'94\
\
      The son answered:\
\
      \'93How are you, Dad?\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon\'92s hand trembled in its thin lavender glove.\
\
      \'93If you\'92re going my way,\'94 he said, \'93I can give you a lift.\'94\
\
      And as though in the habit of taking each other home every night\
      they went out and stepped into the cab.\
\
      To old Jolyon it seemed that his son had grown. \'93More of a man\
      altogether,\'94 was his comment. Over the natural amiability of that\
      son\'92s face had come a rather sardonic mask, as though he had\
      found in the circumstances of his life the necessity for armour.\
      The features were certainly those of a Forsyte, but the\
      expression was more the introspective look of a student or\
      philosopher. He had no doubt been obliged to look into himself a\
      good deal in the course of those fifteen years.\
\
      To young Jolyon the first sight of his father was undoubtedly a\
      shock\'97he looked so worn and old. But in the cab he seemed hardly\
      to have changed, still having the calm look so well remembered,\
      still being upright and keen-eyed.\
\
      \'93You look well, Dad.\'94\
\
      \'93Middling,\'94 old Jolyon answered.\
\
      He was the prey of an anxiety that he found he must put into\
      words. Having got his son back like this, he felt he must know\
      what was his financial position.\
\
      \'93Jo,\'94 he said, \'93I should like to hear what sort of water you\'92re\
      in. I suppose you\'92re in debt?\'94\
\
      He put it this way that his son might find it easier to confess.\
\
      Young Jolyon answered in his ironical voice:\
\
      \'93No! I\'92m not in debt!\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon saw that he was angry, and touched his hand. He had\
      run a risk. It was worth it, however, and Jo had never been sulky\
      with him. They drove on, without speaking again, to Stanhope\
      Gate. Old Jolyon invited him in, but young Jolyon shook his head.\
\
      \'93Jun\'92s not here,\'94 said his father hastily: \'93went off to-day on a\
      visit. I suppose you know that she\'92s engaged to be married?\'94\
\
      \'93Already?\'94 murmured young Jolyon\'92.\
\
      Old Jolyon stepped out, and, in paying the cab fare, for the\
      first time in his life gave the driver a sovereign in mistake for\
      a shilling.\
\
      Placing the coin in his mouth, the cabman whipped his horse\
      secretly on the underneath and hurried away.\
\
      Old Jolyon turned the key softly in the lock, pushed open the\
      door, and beckoned. His son saw him gravely hanging up his coat,\
      with an expression on his face like that of a boy who intends to\
      steal cherries.\
\
      The door of the dining-room was open, the gas turned low; a\
      spirit-urn hissed on a tea-tray, and close to it a cynical\
      looking cat had fallen asleep on the dining-table. Old Jolyon\
      \'93shoo\'92d\'94 her off at once. The incident was a relief to his\
      feelings; he rattled his opera hat behind the animal.\
\
      \'93She\'92s got fleas,\'94 he said, following her out of the room.\
      Through the door in the hall leading to the basement he called\
      \'93Hssst!\'94 several times, as though assisting the cat\'92s departure,\
      till by some strange coincidence the butler appeared below.\
\
      \'93You can go to bed, Parfitt,\'94 said old Jolyon. \'93I will lock up\
      and put out.\'94\
\
      When he again entered the dining-room the cat unfortunately\
      preceded him, with her tail in the air, proclaiming that she had\
      seen through this manouevre for suppressing the butler from the\
      first....\
\
      A fatality had dogged old Jolyon\'92s domestic stratagems all his\
      life.\
\
      Young Jolyon could not help smiling. He was very well versed in\
      irony, and everything that evening seemed to him ironical. The\
      episode of the cat; the announcement of his own daughter\'92s\
      engagement. So he had no more part or parcel in her than he had\
      in the Puss! And the poetical justice of this appealed to him.\
\
      \'93What is June like now?\'94 he asked.\
\
      \'93She\'92s a little thing,\'94 returned old Jolyon; \'93they say she\'92s like\
      me, but that\'92s their folly. She\'92s more like your mother\'97the same\
      eyes and hair.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah! and she is pretty?\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon was too much of a Forsyte to praise anything freely;\
      especially anything for which he had a genuine admiration.\
\
      \'93Not bad looking\'97a regular Forsyte chin. It\'92ll be lonely here\
      when she\'92s gone, Jo.\'94\
\
      The look on his face again gave young Jolyon the shock he had\
      felt on first seeing his father.\
\
      \'93What will you do with yourself, Dad? I suppose she\'92s wrapped up\
      in him?\'94\
\
      \'93Do with myself?\'94 repeated old Jolyon with an angry break in his\
      voice. \'93It\'92ll be miserable work living here alone. I don\'92t know\
      how it\'92s to end. I wish to goodness....\'94 He checked himself, and\
      added: \'93The question is, what had I better do with this house?\'94\
\
      Young Jolyon looked round the room. It was peculiarly vast and\
      dreary, decorated with the enormous pictures of still life that\
      he remembered as a boy\'97sleeping dogs with their noses resting on\
      bunches of carrots, together with onions and grapes lying side by\
      side in mild surprise. The house was a white elephant, but he\
      could not conceive of his father living in a smaller place; and\
      all the more did it all seem ironical.\
\
      In his great chair with the book-rest sat old Jolyon, the\
      figurehead of his family and class and creed, with his white head\
      and dome-like forehead, the representative of moderation, and\
      order, and love of property. As lonely an old man as there was in\
      London.\
\
      There he sat in the gloomy comfort of the room, a puppet in the\
      power of great forces that cared nothing for family or class or\
      creed, but moved, machine-like, with dread processes to\
      inscrutable ends. This was how it struck young Jolyon, who had\
      the impersonal eye.\
\
      The poor old Dad! So this was the end, the purpose to which he\
      had lived with such magnificent moderation! To be lonely, and\
      grow older and older, yearning for a soul to speak to!\
\
      In his turn old Jolyon looked back at his son. He wanted to talk\
      about many things that he had been unable to talk about all these\
      years. It had been impossible to seriously confide in June his\
      conviction that property in the Soho quarter would go up in\
      value; his uneasiness about that tremendous silence of Pippin,\
      the superintendent of the New Colliery Company, of which he had\
      so long been chairman; his disgust at the steady fall in American\
      Golgothas, or even to discuss how, by some sort of settlement, he\
      could best avoid the payment of those death duties which would\
      follow his decease. Under the influence, however, of a cup of\
      tea, which he seemed to stir indefinitely, he began to speak at\
      last. A new vista of life was thus opened up, a promised land of\
      talk, where he could find a harbour against the waves of\
      anticipation and regret; where he could soothe his soul with the\
      opium of devising how to round off his property and make eternal\
      the only part of him that was to remain alive.\
\
      Young Jolyon was a good listener; it was his great quality. He\
      kept his eyes fixed on his father\'92s face, putting a question now\
      and then.\
\
      The clock struck one before old Jolyon had finished, and at the\
      sound of its striking his principles came back. He took out his\
      watch with a look of surprise:\
\
      \'93I must go to bed, Jo,\'94 he said.\
\
      Young Jolyon rose and held out his hand to help his father up.\
      The old face looked worn and hollow again; the eyes were steadily\
      averted.\
\
      \'93Good-bye, my boy; take care of yourself.\'94\
\
      A moment passed, and young Jolyon, turning on his heel, marched\
      out at the door. He could hardly see; his smile quavered. Never\
      in all the fifteen years since he had first found out that life\
      was no simple business, had he found it so singularly\
      complicated.\
\
\
      CHAPTER III DINNER AT SWITHIN\'92S\
\
      In Swithin\'92s orange and light-blue dining-room, facing the Park,\
      the round table was laid for twelve.\
\
      A cut-glass chandelier filled with lighted candles hung like a\
      giant stalactite above its centre, radiating over large\
      gilt-framed mirrors, slabs of marble on the tops of side-tables,\
      and heavy gold chairs with crewel worked seats. Everything\
      betokened that love of beauty so deeply implanted in each family\
      which has had its own way to make into Society, out of the more\
      vulgar heart of Nature. Swithin had indeed an impatience of\
      simplicity, a love of ormolu, which had always stamped him\
      amongst his associates as a man of great, if somewhat luxurious\
      taste; and out of the knowledge that no one could possibly enter\
      his rooms without perceiving him to be a man of wealth, he had\
      derived a solid and prolonged happiness such as perhaps no other\
      circumstance in life had afforded him.\
\
      Since his retirement from land agency, a profession deplorable in\
      his estimation, especially as to its auctioneering department, he\
      had abandoned himself to naturally aristocratic tastes.\
\
      The perfect luxury of his latter days had embedded him like a fly\
      in sugar; and his mind, where very little took place from morning\
      till night, was the junction of two curiously opposite emotions,\
      a lingering and sturdy satisfaction that he had made his own way\
      and his own fortune, and a sense that a man of his distinction\
      should never have been allowed to soil his mind with work.\
\
      He stood at the sideboard in a white waistcoat with large gold\
      and onyx buttons, watching his valet screw the necks of three\
      champagne bottles deeper into ice-pails. Between the points of\
      his stand-up collar, which\'97though it hurt him to move\'97he would on\
      no account have had altered, the pale flesh of his under chin\
      remained immovable. His eyes roved from bottle to bottle. He was\
      debating, and he argued like this: Jolyon drinks a glass, perhaps\
      two, he\'92s so careful of himself. James, he can\'92t take his wine\
      nowadays. Nicholas\'97Fanny and he would swill water he shouldn\'92t\
      wonder! Soames didn\'92t count; these young nephews\'97Soames was\
      thirty-one\'97couldn\'92t drink! But Bosinney?\
\
      Encountering in the name of this stranger something outside the\
      range of his philosophy, Swithin paused. A misgiving arose within\
      him! It was impossible to tell! June was only a girl, in love\
      too! Emily (Mrs. James) liked a good glass of champagne. It was\
      too dry for Juley, poor old soul, she had no palate. As to Hatty\
      Chessman! The thought of this old friend caused a cloud of\
      thought to obscure the perfect glassiness of his eyes: He\
      shouldn\'92t wonder if she drank half a bottle!\
\
      But in thinking of his remaining guest, an expression like that\
      of a cat who is just going to purr stole over his old face: Mrs.\
      Soames! She mightn\'92t take much, but she would appreciate what she\
      drank; it was a pleasure to give her good wine! A pretty\
      woman\'97and sympathetic to him!\
\
      The thought of her was like champagne itself! A pleasure to give\
      a good wine to a young woman who looked so well, who knew how to\
      dress, with charming manners, quite distinguished\'97a pleasure to\
      entertain her. Between the points of his collar he gave his head\
      the first small, painful oscillation of the evening.\
\
      \'93Adolf!\'94 he said. \'93Put in another bottle.\'94\
\
      He himself might drink a good deal, for, thanks to that\
      prescription of Blight\'92s, he found himself extremely well, and he\
      had been careful to take no lunch. He had not felt so well for\
      weeks. Puffing out his lower lip, he gave his last instructions:\
\
      \'93Adolf, the least touch of the West India when you come to the\
      ham.\'94\
\
      Passing into the anteroom, he sat down on the edge of a chair,\
      with his knees apart; and his tall, bulky form was wrapped at\
      once in an expectant, strange, primeval immobility. He was ready\
      to rise at a moment\'92s notice. He had not given a dinner-party for\
      months. This dinner in honour of Jun\'92s engagement had seemed a\
      bore at first (among Forsytes the custom of solemnizing\
      engagements by feasts was religiously observed), but the labours\
      of sending invitations and ordering the repast over, he felt\
      pleasantly stimulated.\
\
      And thus sitting, a watch in his hand, fat, and smooth, and\
      golden, like a flattened globe of butter, he thought of nothing.\
\
      A long man, with side whiskers, who had once been in Swithin\'92s\
      service, but was now a greengrocer, entered and proclaimed:\
\
      \'93Mrs. Chessman, Mrs. Septimus Small!\'94\
\
      Two ladies advanced. The one in front, habited entirely in red,\
      had large, settled patches of the same colour in her cheeks, and\
      a hard, dashing eye. She walked at Swithin, holding out a hand\
      cased in a long, primrose-coloured glove:\
\
      \'93Well! Swithin,\'94 she said, \'93I haven\'92t seen you for ages. How are\
      you? Why, my dear boy, how stout you\'92re getting!\'94\
\
      The fixity of Swithin\'92s eye alone betrayed emotion. A dumb and\
      grumbling anger swelled his bosom. It was vulgar to be stout, to\
      talk of being stout; he had a chest, nothing more. Turning to his\
      sister, he grasped her hand, and said in a tone of command:\
\
      \'93Well, Juley.\'94\
\
      Mrs. Septimus Small was the tallest of the four sisters; her\
      good, round old face had gone a little sour; an innumerable pout\
      clung all over it, as if it had been encased in an iron wire mask\
      up to that evening, which, being suddenly removed, left little\
      rolls of mutinous flesh all over her countenance. Even her eyes\
      were pouting. It was thus that she recorded her permanent\
      resentment at the loss of Septimus Small.\
\
      She had quite a reputation for saying the wrong thing, and,\
      tenacious like all her breed, she would hold to it when she had\
      said it, and add to it another wrong thing, and so on. With the\
      decease of her husband the family tenacity, the family\
      matter-of-factness, had gone sterile within her. A great talker,\
      when allowed, she would converse without the faintest animation\
      for hours together, relating, with epic monotony, the innumerable\
      occasions on which Fortune had misused her; nor did she ever\
      perceive that her hearers sympathized with Fortune, for her heart\
      was kind.\
\
      Having sat, poor soul, long by the bedside of Small (a man of\
      poor constitution), she had acquired the habit, and there were\
      countless subsequent occasions when she had sat immense periods\
      of time to amuse sick people, children, and other helpless\
      persons, and she could never divest herself of the feeling that\
      the world was the most ungrateful place anybody could live in.\
      Sunday after Sunday she sat at the feet of that extremely witty\
      preacher, the Rev. Thomas Scoles, who exercised a great influence\
      over her; but she succeeded in convincing everybody that even\
      this was a misfortune. She had passed into a proverb in the\
      family, and when anybody was observed to be peculiarly\
      distressing, he was known as a regular \'93Juley.\'94 The habit of her\
      mind would have killed anybody but a Forsyte at forty; but she\
      was seventy-two, and had never looked better. And one felt that\
      there were capacities for enjoyment about her which might yet\
      come out. She owned three canaries, the cat Tommy, and half a\
      parrot\'97in common with her sister Hester;\'97and these poor creatures\
      (kept carefully out of Timothy\'92s way\'97he was nervous about\
      animals), unlike human beings, recognising that she could not\
      help being blighted, attached themselves to her passionately.\
\
      She was sombrely magnificent this evening in black bombazine,\
      with a mauve front cut in a shy triangle, and crowned with a\
      black velvet ribbon round the base of her thin throat; black and\
      mauve for evening wear was esteemed very chaste by nearly every\
      Forsyte.\
\
      Pouting at Swithin, she said:\
\
      \'93Ann has been asking for you. You haven\'92t been near us for an\
      age!\'94\
\
      Swithin put his thumbs within the armholes of his waistcoat, and\
      replied:\
\
      \'93Ann\'92s getting very shaky; she ought to have a doctor!\'94\
\
      \'93Mr. and Mrs. Nicholas Forsyte!\'94\
\
      Nicholas Forsyte, cocking his rectangular eyebrows, wore a smile.\
      He had succeeded during the day in bringing to fruition a scheme\
      for the employment of a tribe from Upper India in the gold-mines\
      of Ceylon. A pet plan, carried at last in the teeth of great\
      difficulties\'97he was justly pleased. It would double the output of\
      his mines, and, as he had often forcibly argued, all experience\
      tended to show that a man must die; and whether he died of a\
      miserable old age in his own country, or prematurely of damp in\
      the bottom of a foreign mine, was surely of little consequence,\
      provided that by a change in his mode of life he benefited the\
      British Empire.\
\
      His ability was undoubted. Raising his broken nose towards his\
      listener, he would add:\
\
      \'93For want of a few hundred of these fellows we haven\'92t paid a\
      dividend for years, and look at the price of the shares. I can\'92t\
      get ten shillings for them.\'94\
\
      He had been at Yarmouth, too, and had come back feeling that he\
      had added at least ten years to his own life. He grasped\
      Swithin\'92s hand, exclaiming in a jocular voice:\
\
      \'93Well, so here we are again!\'94\
\
      Mrs. Nicholas, an effete woman, smiled a smile of frightened\
      jollity behind his back.\
\
      \'93Mr. and Mrs. James Forsyte! Mr. and Mrs. Soames Forsyte!\'94\
\
      Swithin drew his heels together, his deportment ever admirable.\
\
      \'93Well, James, well Emily! How are you, Soames? How do you _do?_\'94\
\
      His hand enclosed Irene\'92s, and his eyes swelled. She was a pretty\
      woman\'97a little too pale, but her figure, her eyes, her teeth! Too\
      good for that chap Soames!\
\
      The gods had given Irene dark brown eyes and golden hair, that\
      strange combination, provocative of men\'92s glances, which is said\
      to be the mark of a weak character. And the full, soft pallor of\
      her neck and shoulders, above a gold-coloured frock, gave to her\
      personality an alluring strangeness.\
\
      Soames stood behind, his eyes fastened on his wife\'92s neck. The\
      hands of Swithin\'92s watch, which he still held open in his hand,\
      had left eight behind; it was half an hour beyond his\
      dinner-time\'97he had had no lunch\'97and a strange primeval impatience\
      surged up within him.\
\
      \'93It\'92s not like Jolyon to be late!\'94 he said to Irene, with\
      uncontrollable vexation. \'93I suppose it\'92ll be June keeping him!\'94\
\
      \'93People in love are always late,\'94 she answered.\
\
      Swithin stared at her; a dusky orange dyed his cheeks.\
\
      \'93They\'92ve no business to be. Some fashionable nonsense!\'94\
\
      And behind this outburst the inarticulate violence of primitive\
      generations seemed to mutter and grumble.\
\
      \'93Tell me what you think of my new star, Uncle Swithin,\'94 said\
      Irene softly.\
\
      Among the lace in the bosom of her dress was shining a\
      five-pointed star, made of eleven diamonds. Swithin looked at the\
      star. He had a pretty taste in stones; no question could have\
      been more sympathetically devised to distract his attention.\
\
      \'93Who gave you that?\'94 he asked.\
\
      \'93Soames.\'94\
\
      There was no change in her face, but Swithin\'92s pale eyes bulged\
      as though he might suddenly have been afflicted with insight.\
\
      \'93I dare say you\'92re dull at home,\'94 he said. \'93Any day you like to\
      come and dine with me, I\'92ll give you as good a bottle of wine as\
      you\'92ll get in London.\'94\
\
      \'93Miss June Forsyte\'97Mr. Jolyon Forsyte!... Mr. Boswainey!...\'94\
\
      Swithin moved his arm, and said in a rumbling voice:\
\
      \'93Dinner, now\'97dinner!\'94\
\
      He took in Irene, on the ground that he had not entertained her\
      since she was a bride. June was the portion of Bosinney, who was\
      placed between Irene and his fianc\'e9e. On the other side of June\
      was James with Mrs. Nicholas, then old Jolyon with Mrs. James,\
      Nicholas with Hatty Chessman, Soames with Mrs. Small, completing,\
      the circle to Swithin again.\
\
      Family dinners of the Forsytes observe certain traditions. There\
      are, for instance, no _hors d\'92\'9cuvres_. The reason for this is\
      unknown. Theory among the younger members traces it to the\
      disgraceful price of oysters; it is more probably due to a desire\
      to come to the point, to a good practical sense deciding at once\
      that _hors d\'92\'9cuvres_ are but poor things. The Jameses alone,\
      unable to withstand a custom almost universal in Park Lane, are\
      now and then unfaithful.\
\
      A silent, almost morose, inattention to each other succeeds to\
      the subsidence into their seats, lasting till well into the first\
      entree, but interspersed with remarks such as, \'93Tom\'92s bad again;\
      I can\'92t tell what\'92s the matter with him!\'94 \'93I suppose Ann doesn\'92t\
      come down in the mornings?\'94\'97\'93What\'92s the name of your doctor,\
      Fanny?\'94 \'93Stubbs?\'94 \'93He\'92s a quack!\'94\'97\'93Winifred? She\'92s got too many\
      children. Four, isn\'92t it? She\'92s as thin as a lath!\'94\'97\'93What d\'92you\
      give for this sherry, Swithin? Too dry for me!\'94\
\
      With the second glass of champagne, a kind of hum makes itself\
      heard, which, when divested of casual accessories and resolved\
      into its primal element, is found to be James telling a story,\
      and this goes on for a long time, encroaching sometimes even upon\
      what must universally be recognised as the crowning point of a\
      Forsyte feast\'97\'93the saddle of mutton.\'94\
\
      No Forsyte has given a dinner without providing a saddle of\
      mutton. There is something in its succulent solidity which makes\
      it suitable to people \'93of a certain position.\'94 It is nourishing\
      and tasty; the sort of thing a man remembers eating. It has a\
      past and a future, like a deposit paid into a bank; and it is\
      something that can be argued about.\
\
      Each branch of the family tenaciously held to a particular\
      locality\'97old Jolyon swearing by Dartmoor, James by Welsh, Swithin\
      by Southdown, Nicholas maintaining that people might sneer, but\
      there was nothing like New Zealand! As for Roger, the \'93original\'94\
      of the brothers, he had been obliged to invent a locality of his\
      own, and with an ingenuity worthy of a man who had devised a new\
      profession for his sons, he had discovered a shop where they sold\
      German; on being remonstrated with, he had proved his point by\
      producing a butcher\'92s bill, which showed that he paid more than\
      any of the others. It was on this occasion that old Jolyon,\
      turning to June, had said in one of his bursts of philosophy:\
\
      \'93You may depend upon it, they\'92re a cranky lot, the Forsytes\'97and\
      you\'92ll find it out, as you grow older!\'94\
\
      Timothy alone held apart, for though he ate saddle of mutton\
      heartily, he was, he said, afraid of it.\
\
      To anyone interested psychologically in Forsytes, this great\
      saddle-of-mutton trait is of prime importance; not only does it\
      illustrate their tenacity, both collectively and as individuals,\
      but it marks them as belonging in fibre and instincts to that\
      great class which believes in nourishment and flavour, and yields\
      to no sentimental craving for beauty.\
\
      Younger members of the family indeed would have done without a\
      joint altogether, preferring guinea-fowl, or lobster\
      salad\'97something which appealed to the imagination, and had less\
      nourishment\'97but these were females; or, if not, had been\
      corrupted by their wives, or by mothers, who having been forced\
      to eat saddle of mutton throughout their married lives, had\
      passed a secret hostility towards it into the fibre of their\
      sons.\
\
      The great saddle-of-mutton controversy at an end, a Tewkesbury\
      ham commenced, together with the least touch of West\
      Indian\'97Swithin was so long over this course that he caused a\
      block in the progress of the dinner. To devote himself to it with\
      better heart, he paused in his conversation.\
\
      From his seat by Mrs. Septimus Small Soames was watching. He had\
      a reason of his own connected with a pet building scheme, for\
      observing Bosinney. The architect might do for his purpose; he\
      looked clever, as he sat leaning back in his chair, moodily\
      making little ramparts with bread-crumbs. Soames noted his dress\
      clothes to be well cut, but too small, as though made many years\
      ago.\
\
      He saw him turn to Irene and say something and her face sparkle\
      as he often saw it sparkle at other people\'97never at himself. He\
      tried to catch what they were saying, but Aunt Juley was\
      speaking.\
\
      Hadn\'92t that always seemed very extraordinary to Soames? Only last\
      Sunday dear Mr. Scoles, had been so witty in his sermon, so\
      sarcastic, \'93For what,\'94 he had said, \'93shall it profit a man if he\
      gain his own soul, but lose all his property?\'94 That, he had said,\
      was the motto of the middle-class; now, what _had_ he meant by\
      that? Of course, it might be what middle-class people\
      believed\'97she didn\'92t know; what did Soames think?\
\
      He answered abstractedly: \'93How should I know? Scoles is a humbug,\
      though, isn\'92t he?\'94 For Bosinney was looking round the table, as\
      if pointing out the peculiarities of the guests, and Soames\
      wondered what he was saying. By her smile Irene was evidently\
      agreeing with his remarks. She seemed always to agree with other\
      people.\
\
      Her eyes were turned on himself; Soames dropped his glance at\
      once. The smile had died off her lips.\
\
      A humbug? But what did Soames mean? If Mr. Scoles was a humbug, a\
      clergyman\'97then anybody might be\'97it was frightful!\
\
      \'93Well, and so they are!\'94 said Soames.\
\
      During Aunt Juley\'92s momentary and horrified silence he caught\
      some words of Irene\'92s that sounded like: \'93Abandon hope, all ye\
      who enter here!\'94\
\
      But Swithin had finished his ham.\
\
      \'93Where do you go for your mushrooms?\'94 he was saying to Irene in a\
      voice like a courtier\'92s; \'93you ought to go to Smileybob\'92s\'97he\'92ll\
      give \'92em you fresh. These _little_ men, they won\'92t take the\
      trouble!\'94\
\
      Irene turned to answer him, and Soames saw Bosinney watching her\
      and smiling to himself. A curious smile the fellow had. A\
      half-simple arrangement, like a child who smiles when he is\
      pleased. As for George\'92s nickname\'97\'93The Buccaneer\'94\'97he did not\
      think much of that. And, seeing Bosinney turn to June, Soames\
      smiled too, but sardonically\'97he did not like June, who was not\
      looking too pleased.\
\
      This was not surprising, for she had just held the following\
      conversation with James:\
\
      \'93I stayed on the river on my way home, Uncle James, and saw a\
      beautiful site for a house.\'94\
\
      James, a slow and thorough eater, stopped the process of\
      mastication.\
\
      \'93Eh?\'94 he said. \'93Now, where was that?\'94\
\
      \'93Close to Pangbourne.\'94\
\
      James placed a piece of ham in his mouth, and June waited.\
\
      \'93I suppose you wouldn\'92t know whether the land about there was\
      freehold?\'94 he asked at last. \'93_You_ wouldn\'92t know anything about\
      the price of land about there?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said June; \'93I made inquiries.\'94 Her little resolute face\
      under its copper crown was suspiciously eager and aglow.\
\
      James regarded her with the air of an inquisitor.\
\
      \'93What? You\'92re not thinking of buying land!\'94 he ejaculated,\
      dropping his fork.\
\
      June was greatly encouraged by his interest. It had long been her\
      pet plan that her uncles should benefit themselves and Bosinney\
      by building country-houses.\
\
      \'93Of course not,\'94 she said. \'93I thought it would be such a splendid\
      place for\'97you or\'97someone to build a country-house!\'94\
\
      James looked at her sideways, and placed a second piece of ham in\
      his mouth....\
\
      \'93Land ought to be very dear about there,\'94 he said.\
\
      What June had taken for personal interest was only the impersonal\
      excitement of every Forsyte who hears of something eligible in\
      danger of passing into other hands. But she refused to see the\
      disappearance of her chance, and continued to press her point.\
\
      \'93You ought to go into the country, Uncle James. I wish I had a\
      lot of money, I wouldn\'92t live another day in London.\'94\
\
      James was stirred to the depths of his long thin figure; he had\
      no idea his niece held such downright views.\
\
      \'93Why don\'92t you go into the country?\'94 repeated June; \'93it would do\
      you a lot of good.\'94\
\
      \'93Why?\'94 began James in a fluster. \'93Buying land\'97what good d\'92you\
      suppose I can do buying land, building houses?\'97I couldn\'92t get\
      four per cent. for my money!\'94\
\
      \'93What does that matter? You\'92d get fresh air.\'94\
\
      \'93Fresh air!\'94 exclaimed James; \'93what should I do with fresh air,\'94\
\
      \'93I should have thought anybody liked to have fresh air,\'94 said\
      June scornfully.\
\
      James wiped his napkin all over his mouth.\
\
      \'93You don\'92t know the value of money,\'94 he said, avoiding her eye.\
\
      \'93No! and I hope I never shall!\'94 and, biting her lip with\
      inexpressible mortification, poor June was silent.\
\
      Why were her own relations so rich, and Phil never knew where the\
      money was coming from for to-morrow\'92s tobacco. Why couldn\'92t they\
      do something for him? But they were so selfish. Why couldn\'92t they\
      build country-houses? She had all that naive dogmatism which is\
      so pathetic, and sometimes achieves such great results. Bosinney,\
      to whom she turned in her discomfiture, was talking to Irene, and\
      a chill fell on Jun\'92s spirit. Her eyes grew steady with anger,\
      like old Jolyon\'92s when his will was crossed.\
\
      James, too, was much disturbed. He felt as though someone had\
      threatened his right to invest his money at five per cent. Jolyon\
      had spoiled her. None of _his_ girls would have said such a\
      thing. James had always been exceedingly liberal to his children,\
      and the consciousness of this made him feel it all the more\
      deeply. He trifled moodily with his strawberries, then, deluging\
      them with cream, he ate them quickly; they, at all events, should\
      not escape him.\
\
      No wonder he was upset. Engaged for fifty-four years (he had been\
      admitted a solicitor on the earliest day sanctioned by the law)\
      in arranging mortgages, preserving investments at a dead level of\
      high and safe interest, conducting negotiations on the principle\
      of securing the utmost possible out of other people compatible\
      with safety to his clients and himself, in calculations as to the\
      exact pecuniary possibilities of all the relations of life, he\
      had come at last to think purely in terms of money. Money was now\
      his light, his medium for seeing, that without which he was\
      really unable to see, really not cognisant of phenomena; and to\
      have this thing, \'93I hope I shall never know the value of money!\'94\
      said to his face, saddened and exasperated him. He knew it to be\
      nonsense, or it would have frightened him. What was the world\
      coming to! Suddenly recollecting the story of young Jolyon,\
      however, he felt a little comforted, for what could you expect\
      with a father like that! This turned his thoughts into a channel\
      still less pleasant. What was all this talk about Soames and\
      Irene?\
\
      As in all self-respecting families, an emporium had been\
      established where family secrets were bartered, and family stock\
      priced. It was known on Forsyte \'92Change that Irene regretted her\
      marriage. Her regret was disapproved of. She ought to have known\
      her own mind; no dependable woman made these mistakes.\
\
      James reflected sourly that they had a nice house (rather small)\
      in an excellent position, no children, and no money troubles.\
      Soames was reserved about his affairs, but he must be getting a\
      very warm man. He had a capital income from the business\'97for\
      Soames, like his father, was a member of that well-known firm of\
      solicitors, Forsyte, Bustard and Forsyte\'97and had always been very\
      careful. He had done quite unusually well with some mortgages he\
      had taken up, too\'97a little timely foreclosure\'97most lucky hits!\
\
      There was no reason why Irene should not be happy, yet they said\
      she\'92d been asking for a separate room. He knew where that ended.\
      It wasn\'92t as if Soames drank.\
\
      James looked at his daughter-in-law. That unseen glance of his\
      was cold and dubious. Appeal and fear were in it, and a sense of\
      personal grievance. Why should he be worried like this? It was\
      very likely all nonsense; women were funny things! They\
      exaggerated so, you didn\'92t know what to believe; and then, nobody\
      told him anything, he had to find out everything for himself.\
      Again he looked furtively at Irene, and across from her to\
      Soames. The latter, listening to Aunt Juley, was looking up,\
      under his brows in the direction of Bosinney.\
\
      \'93He\'92s fond of her, I know,\'94 thought James. \'93Look at the way he\'92s\
      always giving her things.\'94\
\
      And the extraordinary unreasonableness of her disaffection struck\
      him with increased force. It was a pity, too, she was a taking\
      little thing, and he, James, would be really quite fond of her if\
      she\'92d only let him. She had taken up lately with June; _that_ was\
      doing her no good, that was certainly doing her no good. She was\
      getting to have opinions of her own. He didn\'92t know what she\
      wanted with anything of the sort. She\'92d a good home, and\
      everything she could wish for. He felt that her friends ought to\
      be chosen for her. To go on like this was dangerous.\
\
      June, indeed, with her habit of championing the unfortunate, had\
      dragged from Irene a confession, and, in return, had preached the\
      necessity of facing the evil, by separation, if need be. But in\
      the face of these exhortations, Irene had kept a brooding\
      silence, as though she found terrible the thought of this\
      struggle carried through in cold blood. He would never give her\
      up, she had said to June.\
\
      \'93Who cares?\'94 June cried; \'93let him do what he likes\'97you\'92ve only to\
      stick to it!\'94 And she had not scrupled to say something of this\
      sort at Timothy\'92s; James, when he heard of it, had felt a natural\
      indignation and horror.\
\
      What if Irene were to take it into her head to\'97he could hardly\
      frame the thought\'97to leave Soames? But he felt this thought so\
      unbearable that he at once put it away; the shady visions it\
      conjured up, the sound of family tongues buzzing in his ears, the\
      horror of the conspicuous happening so close to him, to one of\
      his own children! Luckily, she had no money\'97a beggarly fifty\
      pound a year! And he thought of the deceased Heron, who had had\
      nothing to leave her, with contempt. Brooding over his glass, his\
      long legs twisted under the table, he quite omitted to rise when\
      the ladies left the room. He would have to speak to Soames\'97would\
      have to put him on his guard; they could not go on like this, now\
      that such a contingency had occurred to him. And he noticed with\
      sour disfavour that June had left her wine-glasses full of wine.\
\
      \'93That little, thing\'92s at the bottom of it all,\'94 he mused;\
      \'93Irene\'92d never have thought of it herself.\'94 James was a man of\
      imagination.\
\
      The voice of Swithin roused him from his reverie.\
\
      \'93I gave four hundred pounds for it,\'94 he was saying. \'93Of course\
      it\'92s a regular work of art.\'94\
\
      \'93Four hundred! H\'92m! that\'92s a lot of money!\'94 chimed in Nicholas.\
\
      The object alluded to was an elaborate group of statuary in\
      Italian marble, which, placed upon a lofty stand (also of\
      marble), diffused an atmosphere of culture throughout the room.\
      The subsidiary figures, of which there were six, female, nude,\
      and of highly ornate workmanship, were all pointing towards the\
      central figure, also nude, and female, who was pointing at\
      herself; and all this gave the observer a very pleasant sense of\
      her extreme value. Aunt Juley, nearly opposite, had had the\
      greatest difficulty in not looking at it all the evening.\
\
      Old Jolyon spoke; it was he who had started the discussion.\
\
      \'93Four hundred fiddlesticks! Don\'92t tell me you gave four hundred\
      for _that?_\'94\
\
      Between the points of his collar Swithin\'92s chin made the second\
      painful oscillatory movement of the evening.\
\
      \'93Four-hundred-pounds, of English money; not a farthing less. I\
      don\'92t regret it. It\'92s not common English\'97it\'92s genuine modern\
      Italian!\'94\
\
      Soames raised the corner of his lip in a smile, and looked across\
      at Bosinney. The architect was grinning behind the fumes of his\
      cigarette. Now, indeed, he looked more like a buccaneer.\
\
      \'93There\'92s a lot of work about it,\'94 remarked James hastily, who was\
      really moved by the size of the group. \'93It\'92d sell well at\
      Jobson\'92s.\'94\
\
      \'93The poor foreign dey-vil that made it,\'94 went on Swithin, \'93asked\
      me five hundred\'97I gave him four. It\'92s worth eight. Looked\
      half-starved, poor dey-vil!\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 chimed in Nicholas suddenly, \'93poor, seedy-lookin\'92 chaps,\
      these artists; it\'92s a wonder to me how they live. Now, there\'92s\
      young Flageoletti, that Fanny and the girls are always hav\'92in\'92\
      in, to play the fiddle; if he makes a hundred a year it\'92s as much\
      as ever he does!\'94\
\
      James shook his head. \'93Ah!\'94 he said, \'93_I_ don\'92t know how they\
      live!\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon had risen, and, cigar in mouth, went to inspect the\
      group at close quarters.\
\
      \'93Wouldn\'92t have given two for it!\'94 he pronounced at last.\
\
      Soames saw his father and Nicholas glance at each other\
      anxiously; and, on the other side of Swithin, Bosinney, still\
      shrouded in smoke.\
\
      \'93I wonder what _he_ thinks of it?\'94 thought Soames, who knew well\
      enough that this group was hopelessly _vieux jeu;_ hopelessly of\
      the last generation. There was no longer any sale at Jobson\'92s for\
      such works of art.\
\
      Swithin\'92s answer came at last. \'93You never knew anything about a\
      statue. You\'92ve got your pictures, and that\'92s all!\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon walked back to his seat, puffing his cigar. It was not\
      likely that he was going to be drawn into an argument with an\
      obstinate beggar like Swithin, pig-headed as a mule, who had\
      never known a statue from a\'97-straw hat.\
\
      \'93Stucco!\'94 was all he said.\
\
      It had long been physically impossible for Swithin to start; his\
      fist came down on the table.\
\
      \'93Stucco! I should like to see anything you\'92ve got in your house\
      half as good!\'94\
\
      And behind his speech seemed to sound again that rumbling\
      violence of primitive generations.\
\
      It was James who saved the situation.\
\
      \'93Now, what do you say, Mr. Bosinney? You\'92re an architect; you\
      ought to know all about statues and things!\'94\
\
      Every eye was turned upon Bosinney; all waited with a strange,\
      suspicious look for his answer.\
\
      And Soames, speaking for the first time, asked:\
\
      \'93Yes, Bosinney, what do you say?\'94\
\
      Bosinney replied coolly:\
\
      \'93The work is a remarkable one.\'94\
\
      His words were addressed to Swithin, his eyes smiled slyly at old\
      Jolyon; only Soames remained unsatisfied.\
\
      \'93Remarkable for what?\'94\
\
      \'93For its naivet\'e9.\'94\
\
      The answer was followed by an impressive silence; Swithin alone\
      was not sure whether a compliment was intended.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER IV PROJECTION OF THE HOUSE\
\
      Soames Forsyte walked out of his green-painted front door three\
      days after the dinner at Swithin\'92s, and looking back from across\
      the Square, confirmed his impression that the house wanted\
      painting.\
\
      He had left his wife sitting on the sofa in the drawing-room, her\
      hands crossed in her lap, manifestly waiting for him to go out.\
      This was not unusual. It happened, in fact, every day.\
\
      He could not understand what she found wrong with him. It was not\
      as if he drank! Did he run into debt, or gamble, or swear; was he\
      violent; were his friends rackety; did he stay out at night? On\
      the contrary.\
\
      The profound, subdued aversion which he felt in his wife was a\
      mystery to him, and a source of the most terrible irritation.\
      That she had made a mistake, and did not love him, had tried to\
      love him and could not love him, was obviously no reason.\
\
      He that could imagine so outlandish a cause for his wife\'92s not\
      getting on with him was certainly no Forsyte.\
\
      Soames was forced, therefore, to set the blame entirely down to\
      his wife. He had never met a woman so capable of inspiring\
      affection. They could not go anywhere without his seeing how all\
      the men were attracted by her; their looks, manners, voices,\
      betrayed it; her behaviour under this attention had been beyond\
      reproach. That she was one of those women\'97not too common in the\
      Anglo-Saxon race\'97born to be loved and to love, who when not\
      loving are not living, had certainly never even occurred to him.\
      Her power of attraction, he regarded as part of her value as his\
      property; but it made him, indeed, suspect that she could give as\
      well as receive; and she gave him nothing! \'93Then why did she\
      marry me?\'94 was his continual thought. He had forgotten his\
      courtship; that year and a half when he had besieged and lain in\
      wait for her, devising schemes for her entertainment, giving her\
      presents, proposing to her periodically, and keeping her other\
      admirers away with his perpetual presence. He had forgotten the\
      day when, adroitly taking advantage of an acute phase of her\
      dislike to her home surroundings, he crowned his labours with\
      success. If he remembered anything, it was the dainty\
      capriciousness with which the gold-haired, dark-eyed girl had\
      treated him. He certainly did not remember the look on her\
      face\'97strange, passive, appealing\'97when suddenly one day she had\
      yielded, and said that she would marry him.\
\
      It had been one of those real devoted wooings which books and\
      people praise, when the lover is at length rewarded for hammering\
      the iron till it is malleable, and all must be happy ever after\
      as the wedding bells.\
\
      Soames walked eastwards, mousing doggedly along on the shady\
      side.\
\
      The house wanted doing, up, unless he decided to move into the\
      country, and build.\
\
      For the hundredth time that month he turned over this problem.\
      There was no use in rushing into things! He was very comfortably\
      off, with an increasing income getting on for three thousand a\
      year; but his invested capital was not perhaps so large as his\
      father believed\'97James had a tendency to expect that his children\
      should be better off than they were. \'93I can manage eight thousand\
      easily enough,\'94 he thought, \'93without calling in either\
      Robertson\'92s or Nicholl\'92s.\'94\
\
      He had stopped to look in at a picture shop, for Soames was an\
      \'93amateur\'94 of pictures, and had a little-room in No. 62,\
      Montpellier Square, full of canvases, stacked against the wall,\
      which he had no room to hang. He brought them home with him on\
      his way back from the City, generally after dark, and would enter\
      this room on Sunday afternoons, to spend hours turning the\
      pictures to the light, examining the marks on their backs, and\
      occasionally making notes.\
\
      They were nearly all landscapes with figures in the foreground, a\
      sign of some mysterious revolt against London, its tall houses,\
      its interminable streets, where his life and the lives of his\
      breed and class were passed. Every now and then he would take one\
      or two pictures away with him in a cab, and stop at Jobson\'92s on\
      his way into the City.\
\
      He rarely showed them to anyone; Irene, whose opinion he secretly\
      respected and perhaps for that reason never solicited, had only\
      been into the room on rare occasions, in discharge of some wifely\
      duty. She was not asked to look at the pictures, and she never\
      did. To Soames this was another grievance. He hated that pride of\
      hers, and secretly dreaded it.\
\
      In the plate-glass window of the picture shop his image stood and\
      looked at him.\
\
      His sleek hair under the brim of the tall hat had a sheen like\
      the hat itself; his cheeks, pale and flat, the line of his\
      clean-shaven lips, his firm chin with its greyish shaven tinge,\
      and the buttoned strictness of his black cut-away coat, conveyed\
      an appearance of reserve and secrecy, of imperturbable, enforced\
      composure; but his eyes, cold,\'97grey, strained\'97looking, with a\
      line in the brow between them, examined him wistfully, as if they\
      knew of a secret weakness.\
\
      He noted the subjects of the pictures, the names of the painters,\
      made a calculation of their values, but without the satisfaction\
      he usually derived from this inward appraisement, and walked on.\
\
      No. 62 would do well enough for another year, if he decided to\
      build! The times were good for building, money had not been so\
      dear for years; and the site he had seen at Robin Hill, when he\
      had gone down there in the spring to inspect the Nicholl\
      mortgage\'97what could be better! Within twelve miles of Hyde Park\
      Corner, the value of the land certain to go up, would always\
      fetch more than he gave for it; so that a house, if built in\
      really good style, was a first-class investment.\
\
      The notion of being the one member of his family with a country\
      house weighed but little with him; for to a true Forsyte,\
      sentiment, even the sentiment of social position, was a luxury\
      only to be indulged in after his appetite for more material\
      pleasure had been satisfied.\
\
      To get Irene out of London, away from opportunities of going\
      about and seeing people, away from her friends and those who put\
      ideas into her head! That was the thing! She was too thick with\
      June! June disliked him. He returned the sentiment. They were of\
      the same blood.\
\
      It would be everything to get Irene out of town. The house would\
      please her, she would enjoy messing about with the decoration,\
      she was very artistic!\
\
      The house must be in good style, something that would always be\
      certain to command a price, something unique, like that last\
      house of Parkes, which had a tower; but Parkes had himself said\
      that his architect was ruinous. You never knew where you were\
      with those fellows; if they had a name they ran you into no end\
      of expense and were conceited into the bargain.\
\
      And a common architect was no good\'97the memory of Parkes\'92 tower\
      precluded the employment of a common architect:\
\
      This was why he had thought of Bosinney. Since the dinner at\
      Swithin\'92s he had made enquiries, the result of which had been\
      meagre, but encouraging: \'93One of the new school.\'94\
\
      \'93Clever?\'94\
\
      \'93As clever as you like\'97a bit\'97a bit up in the air!\'94\
\
      He had not been able to discover what houses Bosinney had built,\
      nor what his charges were. The impression he gathered was that he\
      would be able to make his own terms. The more he reflected on the\
      idea, the more he liked it. It would be keeping the thing in the\
      family, with Forsytes almost an instinct; and he would be able to\
      get \'93favoured-nation,\'94 if not nominal terms\'97only fair,\
      considering the chance to Bosinney of displaying his talents, for\
      this house must be no common edifice.\
\
      Soames reflected complacently on the work it would be sure to\
      bring the young man; for, like every Forsyte, he could be a\
      thorough optimist when there was anything to be had out of it.\
\
      Bosinney\'92s office was in Sloane Street, close at, hand, so that\
      he would be able to keep his eye continually on the plans.\
\
      Again, Irene would not be to likely to object to leave London if\
      her greatest friend\'92s lover were given the job. Jun\'92s marriage\
      might depend on it. Irene could not decently stand in the way of\
      Jun\'92s marriage; she would never do that, he knew her too well.\
      And June would be pleased; of this he saw the advantage.\
\
      Bosinney looked clever, but he had also\'97and\'97it was one of his\
      great attractions\'97an air as if he did not quite know on which\
      side his bread were buttered; he should be easy to deal with in\
      money matters. Soames made this reflection in no defrauding\
      spirit; it was the natural attitude of his mind\'97of the mind of\
      any good business man\'97of all those thousands of good business men\
      through whom he was threading his way up Ludgate Hill.\
\
      Thus he fulfilled the inscrutable laws of his great class\'97of\
      human nature itself\'97when he reflected, with a sense of comfort,\
      that Bosinney would be easy to deal with in money matters.\
\
      While he elbowed his way on, his eyes, which he usually kept\
      fixed on the ground before his feet, were attracted upwards by\
      the dome of St. Paul\'92s. It had a peculiar fascination for him,\
      that old dome, and not once, but twice or three times a week,\
      would he halt in his daily pilgrimage to enter beneath and stop\
      in the side aisles for five or ten minutes, scrutinizing the\
      names and epitaphs on the monuments. The attraction for him of\
      this great church was inexplicable, unless it enabled him to\
      concentrate his thoughts on the business of the day. If any\
      affair of particular moment, or demanding peculiar acuteness, was\
      weighing on his mind, he invariably went in, to wander with\
      mouse-like attention from epitaph to epitaph. Then retiring in\
      the same noiseless way, he would hold steadily on up Cheapside, a\
      thought more of dogged purpose in his gait, as though he had seen\
      something which he had made up his mind to buy.\
\
      He went in this morning, but, instead of stealing from monument\
      to monument, turned his eyes upwards to the columns and spacings\
      of the walls, and remained motionless.\
\
      His uplifted face, with the awed and wistful look which faces\
      take on themselves in church, was whitened to a chalky hue in the\
      vast building. His gloved hands were clasped in front over the\
      handle of his umbrella. He lifted them. Some sacred inspiration\
      perhaps had come to him.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 he thought, \'93I must have room to hang my pictures.\'94\
\
      That evening, on his return from the City, he called at\
      Bosinney\'92s office. He found the architect in his shirt-sleeves,\
      smoking a pipe, and ruling off lines on a plan. Soames refused a\
      drink, and came at once to the point.\
\
      \'93If you\'92ve nothing better to do on Sunday, come down with me to\
      Robin Hill, and give me your opinion on a building site.\'94\
\
      \'93Are you going to build?\'94\
\
      \'93Perhaps,\'94 said Soames; \'93but don\'92t speak of it. I just want your\
      opinion.\'94\
\
      \'93Quite so,\'94 said the architect.\
\
      Soames peered about the room.\
\
      \'93You\'92re rather high up here,\'94 he remarked.\
\
      Any information he could gather about the nature and scope of\
      Bosinney\'92s business would be all to the good.\
\
      \'93It does well enough for me so far,\'94 answered the architect.\
      \'93You\'92re accustomed to the swells.\'94\
\
      He knocked out his pipe, but replaced it empty between his teeth;\
      it assisted him perhaps to carry on the conversation. Soames\
      noted a hollow in each cheek, made as it were by suction.\
\
      \'93What do you pay for an office like this?\'94 said he.\
\
      \'93Fifty too much,\'94 replied Bosinney.\
\
      This answer impressed Soames favourably.\
\
      \'93I suppose it _is_ dear,\'94 he said. \'93I\'92ll call for you\'97on Sunday\
      about eleven.\'94\
\
      The following Sunday therefore he called for Bosinney in a\
      hansom, and drove him to the station. On arriving at Robin Hill,\
      they found no cab, and started to walk the mile and a half to the\
      site.\
\
      It was the 1st of August\'97a perfect day, with a burning sun and\
      cloudless sky\'97and in the straight, narrow road leading up the\
      hill their feet kicked up a yellow dust.\
\
      \'93Gravel soil,\'94 remarked Soames, and sideways he glanced at the\
      coat Bosinney wore. Into the side-pockets of this coat were\
      thrust bundles of papers, and under one arm was carried a\
      queer-looking stick. Soames noted these and other peculiarities.\
\
      No one but a clever man, or, indeed, a buccaneer, would have\
      taken such liberties with his appearance; and though these\
      eccentricities were revolting to Soames, he derived a certain\
      satisfaction from them, as evidence of qualities by which he must\
      inevitably profit. If the fellow could build houses, what did his\
      clothes matter?\
\
      \'93I told you,\'94 he said, \'93that I want this house to be a surprise,\
      so don\'92t say anything about it. I never talk of my affairs until\
      they\'92re carried through.\'94\
\
      Bosinney nodded.\
\
      \'93Let women into your plans,\'94 pursued Soames, \'93and you never know\
      where it\'92ll end.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 Said Bosinney, \'93women are the devil!\'94\
\
      This feeling had long been at the bottom of Soames\'92s heart; he\
      had never, however, put it into words.\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 he muttered, \'93so you\'92re beginning to....\'94 He stopped, but\
      added, with an uncontrollable burst of spite: \'93Jun\'92s got a temper\
      of her own\'97always had.\'94\
\
      \'93A temper\'92s not a bad thing in an angel.\'94\
\
      Soames had never called Irene an angel. He could not so have\
      violated his best instincts, letting other people into the secret\
      of her value, and giving himself away. He made no reply.\
\
      They had struck into a half-made road across a warren. A\
      cart-track led at right-angles to a gravel pit, beyond which the\
      chimneys of a cottage rose amongst a clump of trees at the border\
      of a thick wood. Tussocks of feathery grass covered the rough\
      surface of the ground, and out of these the larks soared into the\
      haze of sunshine. On the far horizon, over a countless succession\
      of fields and hedges, rose a line of downs.\
\
      Soames led till they had crossed to the far side, and there he\
      stopped. It was the chosen site; but now that he was about to\
      divulge the spot to another he had become uneasy.\
\
      \'93The agent lives in that cottage,\'94 he said; \'93he\'92ll give us some\
      lunch\'97we\'92d better have lunch before we go into this matter.\'94\
\
      He again took the lead to the cottage, where the agent, a tall\
      man named Oliver, with a heavy face and grizzled beard, welcomed\
      them. During lunch, which Soames hardly touched, he kept looking\
      at Bosinney, and once or twice passed his silk handkerchief\
      stealthily over his forehead. The meal came to an end at last,\
      and Bosinney rose.\
\
      \'93I dare say you\'92ve got business to talk over,\'94 he said; \'93I\'92ll\
      just go and nose about a bit.\'94 Without waiting for a reply he\
      strolled out.\
\
      Soames was solicitor to this estate, and he spent nearly an hour\
      in the agent\'92s company, looking at ground-plans and discussing\
      the Nicholl and other mortgages; it was as it were by an\
      afterthought that he brought up the question of the building\
      site.\
\
      \'93Your people,\'94 he said, \'93ought to come down in their price to me,\
      considering that I shall be the first to build.\'94\
\
      Oliver shook his head.\
\
      The site you\'92ve fixed on, Sir, he said, \'93is the cheapest we\'92ve\
      got. Sites at the top of the slope are dearer by a good bit.\'94\
\
      \'93Mind,\'94 said Soames, \'93I\'92ve not decided; it\'92s quite possible I\
      shan\'92t build at all. The ground rent\'92s very high.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, Mr. Forsyte, I shall be sorry if you go off, and I think\
      you\'92ll make a mistake, Sir. There\'92s not a bit of land near London\
      with such a view as this, nor one that\'92s cheaper, all things\
      considered; we\'92ve only to advertise, to get a mob of people after\
      it.\'94\
\
      They looked at each other. Their faces said very plainly: \'93I\
      respect you as a man of business; and you can\'92t expect me to\
      believe a word you say.\'94\
\
      Well, repeated Soames, \'93I haven\'92t made up my mind; the thing will\
      very likely go off!\'94 With these words, taking up his umbrella, he\
      put his chilly hand into the agent\'92s, withdrew it without the\
      faintest pressure, and went out into the sun.\
\
      He walked slowly back towards the site in deep thought. His\
      instinct told him that what the agent had said was true. A cheap\
      site. And the beauty of it was, that he knew the agent did not\
      really think it cheap; so that his own intuitive knowledge was a\
      victory over the agent\'92s.\
\
      \'93Cheap or not, I mean to have it,\'94 he thought.\
\
      The larks sprang up in front of his feet, the air was full of\
      butterflies, a sweet fragrance rose from the wild grasses. The\
      sappy scent of the bracken stole forth from the wood, where,\
      hidden in the depths, pigeons were cooing, and from afar on the\
      warm breeze, came the rhythmic chiming of church bells.\
\
      Soames walked with his eyes on the ground, his lips opening and\
      closing as though in anticipation of a delicious morsel. But when\
      he arrived at the site, Bosinney was nowhere to be seen. After\
      waiting some little time, he crossed the warren in the direction\
      of the slope. He would have shouted, but dreaded the sound of his\
      voice.\
\
      The warren was as lonely as a prairie, its silence only broken by\
      the rustle of rabbits bolting to their holes, and the song of the\
      larks.\
\
      Soames, the pioneer-leader of the great Forsyte army advancing to\
      the civilization of this wilderness, felt his spirit daunted by\
      the loneliness, by the invisible singing, and the hot, sweet air.\
      He had begun to retrace his steps when he at last caught sight of\
      Bosinney.\
\
      The architect was sprawling under a large oak tree, whose trunk,\
      with a huge spread of bough and foliage, ragged with age, stood\
      on the verge of the rise.\
\
      Soames had to touch him on the shoulder before he looked up.\
\
      \'93Hallo! Forsyte,\'94 he said, \'93I\'92ve found the very place for your\
      house! Look here!\'94\
\
      Soames stood and looked, then he said, coldly:\
\
      \'93You may be very clever, but this site will cost me half as much\
      again.\'94\
\
      \'93Hang the cost, man. Look at the view!\'94\
\
      Almost from their feet stretched ripe corn, dipping to a small\
      dark copse beyond. A plain of fields and hedges spread to the\
      distant grey-bluedowns. In a silver streak to the right could be\
      seen the line of the river.\
\
      The sky was so blue, and the sun so bright, that an eternal\
      summer seemed to reign over this prospect. Thistledown floated\
      round them, enraptured by the serenity, of the ether. The heat\
      danced over the corn, and, pervading all, was a soft, insensible\
      hum, like the murmur of bright minutes holding revel between\
      earth and heaven.\
\
      Soames looked. In spite of himself, something swelled in his\
      breast. To live here in sight of all this, to be able to point it\
      out to his friends, to talk of it, to possess it! His cheeks\
      flushed. The warmth, the radiance, the glow, were sinking into\
      his senses as, four years before, Irene\'92s beauty had sunk into\
      his senses and made him long for her. He stole a glance at\
      Bosinney, whose eyes, the eyes of the coachman\'92s \'93half-tame\
      leopard,\'94 seemed running wild over the landscape. The sunlight\
      had caught the promontories of the fellow\'92s face, the bumpy\
      cheekbones, the point of his chin, the vertical ridges above his\
      brow; and Soames watched this rugged, enthusiastic, careless face\
      with an unpleasant feeling.\
\
      A long, soft ripple of wind flowed over the corn, and brought a\
      puff of warm air into their faces.\
\
      \'93I could build you a teaser here,\'94 said Bosinney, breaking the\
      silence at last.\
\
      \'93I dare say,\'94 replied Soames, drily. \'93You haven\'92t got to pay for\
      it.\'94\
\
      \'93For about eight thousand I could build you a palace.\'94\
\
      Soames had become very pale\'97a struggle was going on within him.\
      He dropped his eyes, and said stubbornly:\
\
      \'93I can\'92t afford it.\'94\
\
      And slowly, with his mousing walk, he led the way back to the\
      first site.\
\
      They spent some time there going into particulars of the\
      projected house, and then Soames returned to the agent\'92s cottage.\
\
      He came out in about half an hour, and, joining Bosinney, started\
      for the station.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said, hardly opening his lips, \'93I\'92ve taken that site\
      of yours, after all.\'94\
\
      And again he was silent, confusedly debating how it was that this\
      fellow, whom by habit he despised, should have overborne his own\
      decision.\
\
\
      CHAPTER V A FORSYTE M\'c9NAGE\
\
      Like the enlightened thousands of his class and generation in\
      this great city of London, who no longer believe in red velvet\
      chairs, and know that groups of modern Italian marble are \'93_vieux\
      jeu_,\'94 Soames Forsyte inhabited a house which did what it could.\
      It owned a copper door knocker of individual design, windows\
      which had been altered to open outwards, hanging flower boxes\
      filled with fuchsias, and at the back (a great feature) a little\
      court tiled with jade-green tiles, and surrounded by pink\
      hydrangeas in peacock-blue tubs. Here, under a parchment-coloured\
      Japanese sunshade covering the whole end, inhabitants or visitors\
      could be screened from the eyes of the curious while they drank\
      tea and examined at their leisure the latest of Soames\'92s little\
      silver boxes.\
\
      The inner decoration favoured the First Empire and William\
      Morris. For its size, the house was commodious; there were\
      countless nooks resembling birds\'92 nests, and little things made\
      of silver were deposited like eggs.\
\
      In this general perfection two kinds of fastidiousness were at\
      war. There lived here a mistress who would have dwelt daintily on\
      a desert island; a master whose daintiness was, as it were, an\
      investment, cultivated by the owner for his advancement, in\
      accordance with the laws of competition. This competitive\
      daintiness had caused Soames in his Marlborough days to be the\
      first boy into white waistcoats in summer, and corduroy\
      waistcoats in winter, had prevented him from ever appearing in\
      public with his tie climbing up his collar, and induced him to\
      dust his patent leather boots before a great multitude assembled\
      on Speech Day to hear him recite Moli\'e8re.\
\
      Skin-like immaculateness had grown over Soames, as over many\
      Londoners; impossible to conceive of him with a hair out of\
      place, a tie deviating one-eighth of an inch from the\
      perpendicular, a collar unglossed! He would not have gone without\
      a bath for worlds\'97it was the fashion to take baths; and how\
      bitter was his scorn of people who omitted them!\
\
      But Irene could be imagined, like some nymph, bathing in wayside\
      streams, for the joy of the freshness and of seeing her own fair\
      body.\
\
      In this conflict throughout the house the woman had gone to the\
      wall. As in the struggle between Saxon and Celt still going on\
      within the nation, the more impressionable and receptive\
      temperament had had forced on it a conventional superstructure.\
\
      Thus the house had acquired a close resemblance to hundreds of\
      other houses with the same high aspirations, having become: \'93That\
      very charming little house of the Soames Forsytes, quite\
      individual, my dear\'97really elegant.\'94\
\
      For Soames Forsyte\'97read James Peabody, Thomas Atkins, or Emmanuel\
      Spagnoletti, the name in fact of any upper-middle class\
      Englishman in London with any pretensions to taste; and though\
      the decoration be different, the phrase is just.\
\
      On the evening of August 8, a week after the expedition to Robin\
      Hill, in the dining-room of this house\'97\'93quite individual, my\
      dear\'97really elegant\'94\'97Soames and Irene were seated at dinner. A\
      hot dinner on Sundays was a little distinguishing elegance common\
      to this house and many others. Early in married life Soames had\
      laid down the rule: \'93The servants must give us hot dinner on\
      Sundays\'97they\'92ve nothing to do but play the concertina.\'94\
\
      The custom had produced no revolution. For\'97to Soames a rather\
      deplorable sign\'97servants were devoted to Irene, who, in defiance\
      of all safe tradition, appeared to recognise their right to a\
      share in the weaknesses of human nature.\
\
      The happy pair were seated, not opposite each other, but\
      rectangularly, at the handsome rosewood table; they dined without\
      a cloth\'97a distinguishing elegance\'97and so far had not spoken a\
      word.\
\
      Soames liked to talk during dinner about business, or what he had\
      been buying, and so long as he talked Irene\'92s silence did not\
      distress him. This evening he had found it impossible to talk.\
      The decision to build had been weighing on his mind all the week,\
      and he had made up his mind to tell her.\
\
      His nervousness about this disclosure irritated him profoundly;\
      she had no business to make him feel like that\'97a wife and a\
      husband being one person. She had not looked at him once since\
      they sat down; and he wondered what on earth she had been\
      thinking about all the time. It was hard, when a man worked as he\
      did, making money for her\'97yes, and with an ache in his heart\'97that\
      she should sit there, looking\'97looking as if she saw the walls of\
      the room closing in. It was enough to make a man get up and leave\
      the table.\
\
      The light from the rose-shaded lamp fell on her neck and\
      arms\'97Soames liked her to dine in a low dress, it gave him an\
      inexpressible feeling of superiority to the majority of his\
      acquaintance, whose wives were contented with their best high\
      frocks or with tea-gowns, when they dined at home. Under that\
      rosy light her amber-coloured hair and fair skin made strange\
      contrast with her dark brown eyes.\
\
      Could a man own anything prettier than this dining-table with its\
      deep tints, the starry, soft-petalled roses, the ruby-coloured\
      glass, and quaint silver furnishing; could a man own anything\
      prettier than the woman who sat at it? Gratitude was no virtue\
      among Forsytes, who, competitive, and full of common-sense, had\
      no occasion for it; and Soames only experienced a sense of\
      exasperation amounting to pain, that he did not own her as it was\
      his right to own her, that he could not, as by stretching out his\
      hand to that rose, pluck her and sniff the very secrets of her\
      heart.\
\
      Out of his other property, out of all the things he had\
      collected, his silver, his pictures, his houses, his investments,\
      he got a secret and intimate feeling; out of her he got none.\
\
      In this house of his there was writing on every wall. His\
      business-like temperament protested against a mysterious warning\
      that she was not made for him. He had married this woman,\
      conquered her, made her his own, and it seemed to him contrary to\
      the most fundamental of all laws, the law of possession, that he\
      could do no more than own her body\'97if indeed he could do that,\
      which he was beginning to doubt. If any one had asked him if he\
      wanted to own her soul, the question would have seemed to him\
      both ridiculous and sentimental. But he did so want, and the\
      writing said he never would.\
\
      She was ever silent, passive, gracefully averse; as though\
      terrified lest by word, motion, or sign she might lead him to\
      believe that she was fond of him; and he asked himself: Must I\
      always go on like this?\
\
      Like most novel readers of his generation (and Soames was a great\
      novel reader), literature coloured his view of life; and he had\
      imbibed the belief that it was only a question of time.\
\
      In the end the husband always gained the affection of his wife.\
      Even in those cases\'97a class of book he was not very fond of\'97which\
      ended in tragedy, the wife always died with poignant regrets on\
      her lips, or if it were the husband who died\'97unpleasant\
      thought\'97threw herself on his body in an agony of remorse.\
\
      He often took Irene to the theatre, instinctively choosing the\
      modern Society Plays with the modern Society conjugal problem, so\
      fortunately different from any conjugal problem in real life. He\
      found that they too always ended in the same way, even when there\
      was a lover in the case. While he was watching the play Soames\
      often sympathized with the lover; but before he reached home\
      again, driving with Irene in a hansom, he saw that this would not\
      do, and he was glad the play had ended as it had. There was one\
      class of husband that had just then come into fashion, the\
      strong, rather rough, but extremely sound man, who was peculiarly\
      successful at the end of the play; with this person Soames was\
      really not in sympathy, and had it not been for his own position,\
      would have expressed his disgust with the fellow. But he was so\
      conscious of how vital to himself was the necessity for being a\
      successful, even a \'93strong,\'94 husband, that he never spoke of a\
      distaste born perhaps by the perverse processes of Nature out of\
      a secret fund of brutality in himself.\
\
      But Irene\'92s silence this evening was exceptional. He had never\
      before seen such an expression on her face. And since it is\
      always the unusual which alarms, Soames was alarmed. He ate his\
      savoury, and hurried the maid as she swept off the crumbs with\
      the silver sweeper. When she had left the room, he filled his\
      glass with wine and said:\
\
      \'93Anybody been here this afternoon?\'94\
\
      \'93June.\'94\
\
      \'93What did _she_ want?\'94 It was an axiom with the Forsytes that\
      people did not go anywhere unless they wanted something. \'93Came to\
      talk about her lover, I suppose?\'94\
\
      Irene made no reply.\
\
      \'93It looks to me,\'94 continued Soames, \'93as if she were sweeter on\
      him than he is on her. She\'92s always following him about.\'94\
\
      Irene\'92s eyes made him feel uncomfortable.\
\
      \'93You\'92ve no business to say such a thing!\'94 she exclaimed.\
\
      \'93Why not? Anybody can see it.\'94\
\
      \'93They cannot. And if they could, it\'92s disgraceful to say so.\'94\
\
      Soames\'92s composure gave way.\
\
      \'93You\'92re a pretty wife!\'94 he said. But secretly he wondered at the\
      heat of her reply; it was unlike her. \'93You\'92re cracked about June!\
      I can tell you one thing: now that she has the Buccaneer in tow,\
      she doesn\'92t care twopence about you, and, you\'92ll find it out. But\
      you won\'92t see so much of her in future; we\'92re going to live in\
      the country.\'94\
\
      He had been glad to get his news out under cover of this burst of\
      irritation. He had expected a cry of dismay; the silence with\
      which his pronouncement was received alarmed him.\
\
      \'93You don\'92t seem interested,\'94 he was obliged to add.\
\
      \'93I knew it already.\'94\
\
      He looked at her sharply.\
\
      \'93Who told you?\'94\
\
      \'93June.\'94\
\
      \'93How did she know?\'94\
\
      Irene did not answer. Baffled and uncomfortable, he said:\
\
      \'93It\'92s a fine thing for Bosinney, it\'92ll be the making of him. I\
      suppose she\'92s told you all about it?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      There was another pause, and then Soames said:\
\
      \'93I suppose you don\'92t want to, go?\'94\
\
      Irene made no reply.\
\
      \'93Well, I can\'92t tell what you want. You never seem contented\
      here.\'94\
\
      \'93Have my wishes anything to do with it?\'94\
\
      She took the vase of roses and left the room. Soames remained\
      seated. Was it for this that he had signed that contract? Was it\
      for this that he was going to spend some ten thousand pounds?\
      Bosinney\'92s phrase came back to him: \'93Women are the devil!\'94\
\
      But presently he grew calmer. It might have been worse. She might\
      have flared up. He had expected something more than this. It was\
      lucky, after all, that June had broken the ice for him. She must\
      have wormed it out of Bosinney; he might have known she would.\
\
      He lighted his cigarette. After all, Irene had not made a scene!\
      She would come round\'97that was the best of her; she was cold, but\
      not sulky. And, puffing the cigarette smoke at a lady-bird on the\
      shining table, he plunged into a reverie about the house. It was\
      no good worrying; he would go and make it up presently. She would\
      be sitting out there in the dark, under the Japanese sunshade,\
      knitting. A beautiful, warm night....\
\
      In truth, June had come in that afternoon with shining eyes, and\
      the words: \'93Soames is a brick! It\'92s splendid for Phil\'97the very\
      thing for him!\'94\
\
      Irene\'92s face remaining dark and puzzled, she went on:\
\
      \'93Your new house at Robin Hill, of course. What? Don\'92t you know?\'94\
\
      Irene did not know.\
\
      \'93Oh! then, I suppose I oughtn\'92t to have told you!\'94 Looking\
      impatiently at her friend, she cried: \'93You look as if you didn\'92t\
      care. Don\'92t you see, it\'92s what I\'92ve been praying for\'97the very\
      chance he\'92s been wanting all this time. Now you\'92ll see what he\
      can do;\'94 and thereupon she poured out the whole story.\
\
      Since her own engagement she had not seemed much interested in\
      her friend\'92s position; the hours she spent with Irene were given\
      to confidences of her own; and at times, for all her affectionate\
      pity, it was impossible to keep out of her smile a trace of\
      compassionate contempt for the woman who had made such a mistake\
      in her life\'97such a vast, ridiculous mistake.\
\
      \'93He\'92s to have all the decorations as well\'97a free hand. It\'92s\
      perfect\'97\'94 June broke into laughter, her little figure quivered\
      gleefully; she raised her hand, and struck a blow at a muslin\
      curtain. \'93Do you, know I even asked Uncle James....\'94 But, with a\
      sudden dislike to mentioning that incident, she stopped; and\
      presently, finding her friend so unresponsive, went away. She\
      looked back from the pavement, and Irene was still standing in\
      the doorway. In response to her farewell wave, Irene put her hand\
      to her brow, and, turning slowly, shut the door....\
\
      Soames went to the drawing-room presently, and peered at her\
      through the window.\
\
      Out in the shadow of the Japanese sunshade she was sitting very\
      still, the lace on her white shoulders stirring with the soft\
      rise and fall of her bosom.\
\
      But about this silent creature sitting there so motionless, in\
      the dark, there seemed a warmth, a hidden fervour of feeling, as\
      if the whole of her being had been stirred, and some change were\
      taking place in its very depths.\
\
      He stole back to the dining-room unnoticed.\
\
\
      CHAPTER VI JAMES AT LARGE\
\
      It was not long before Soames\'92s determination to build went the\
      round of the family, and created the flutter that any decision\
      connected with property should make among Forsytes.\
\
      It was not his fault, for he had been determined that no one\
      should know. June, in the fulness of her heart, had told Mrs.\
      Small, giving her leave only to tell Aunt Ann\'97she thought it\
      would cheer her, the poor old sweet! for Aunt Ann had kept her\
      room now for many days.\
\
      Mrs. Small told Aunt Ann at once, who, smiling as she lay back on\
      her pillows, said in her distinct, trembling old voice:\
\
      \'93It\'92s very nice for dear June; but I hope they will be\
      careful\'97it\'92s rather dangerous!\'94\
\
      When she was left alone again, a frown, like a cloud presaging a\
      rainy morrow, crossed her face.\
\
      While she was lying there so many days the process of recharging\
      her will went on all the time; it spread to her face, too, and\
      tightening movements were always in action at the corners of her\
      lips.\
\
      The maid Smither, who had been in her service since girlhood, and\
      was spoken of as \'93Smither\'97a good girl\'97but so slow!\'94\'97the maid\
      Smither performed every morning with extreme punctiliousness the\
      crowning ceremony of that ancient toilet. Taking from the\
      recesses of their pure white band-box those flat, grey curls, the\
      insignia of personal dignity, she placed them securely in her\
      mistress\'92s hands, and turned her back.\
\
      And every day Aunts Juley and Hester were required to come and\
      report on Timothy; what news there was of Nicholas; whether dear\
      June had succeeded in getting Jolyon to shorten the engagement,\
      now that Mr. Bosinney was building Soames a house; whether young\
      Roger\'92s wife was really\'97expecting; how the operation on Archie\
      had succeeded; and what Swithin had done about that empty house\
      in Wigmore Street, where the tenant had lost all his money and\
      treated him so badly; above all, about Soames; was Irene\
      still\'97still asking for a separate room? And every morning Smither\
      was told: \'93I shall be coming down this afternoon, Smither, about\
      two o\'92clock. I shall want your arm, after all these days in bed!\'94\
\
      After telling Aunt Ann, Mrs. Small had spoken of the house in the\
      strictest confidence to Mrs. Nicholas, who in her turn had asked\
      Winifred Dartie for confirmation, supposing, of course, that,\
      being Soames\'92s sister, she would know all about it. Through her\
      it had in due course come round to the ears of James. He had been\
      a good deal agitated.\
\
      \'93Nobody,\'94 he said, \'93told him anything.\'94 And, rather than go\
      direct to Soames himself, of whose taciturnity he was afraid, he\
      took his umbrella and went round to Timothy\'92s.\
\
      He found Mrs. Septimus and Hester (who had been told\'97she was so\
      safe, she found it tiring to talk) ready, and indeed eager, to\
      discuss the news. It was very good of dear Soames, they thought,\
      to employ Mr. Bosinney, but rather risky. What had George named\
      him? \'93The Buccaneer!\'94 How droll! But George was always droll!\
      However, it would be all in the family they supposed they must\
      really look upon Mr. Bosinney as belonging to the family, though\
      it seemed strange.\
\
      James here broke in:\
\
      \'93Nobody knows anything about him. I don\'92t see what Soames wants\
      with a young man like that. I shouldn\'92t be surprised if Irene had\
      put her oar in. I shall speak to....\'94\
\
      \'93Soames,\'94 interposed Aunt Juley, \'93told Mr. Bosinney that he\
      didn\'92t wish it mentioned. He wouldn\'92t like it to be talked about,\
      I\'92m sure, and if Timothy knew he would be very vexed, I....\'94\
\
      James put his hand behind his ear:\
\
      \'93What?\'94 he said. \'93I\'92m getting very deaf. I suppose I don\'92t hear\
      people. Emily\'92s got a bad toe. We shan\'92t be able to start for\
      Wales till the end of the month. There\'92s always something!\'94 And,\
      having got what he wanted, he took his hat and went away.\
\
      It was a fine afternoon, and he walked across the Park towards\
      Soames\'92s, where he intended to dine, for Emily\'92s toe kept her in\
      bed, and Rachel and Cicely were on a visit to the country. He\
      took the slanting path from the Bayswater side of the Row to the\
      Knightsbridge Gate, across a pasture of short, burnt grass,\
      dotted with blackened sheep, strewn with seated couples and\
      strange waifs; lying prone on their faces, like corpses on a\
      field over which the wave of battle has rolled.\
\
      He walked rapidly, his head bent, looking neither to right nor\
      left. The appearance of this park, the centre of his own\
      battle-field, where he had all his life been fighting, excited no\
      thought or speculation in his mind. These corpses flung down,\
      there, from out the press and turmoil of the struggle, these\
      pairs of lovers sitting cheek by jowl for an hour of idle Elysium\
      snatched from the monotony of their treadmill, awakened no\
      fancies in his mind; he had outlived that kind of imagination;\
      his nose, like the nose of a sheep, was fastened to the pastures\
      on which he browsed.\
\
      One of his tenants had lately shown a disposition to be\
      behind-hand in his rent, and it had become a grave question\
      whether he had not better turn him out at once, and so run the\
      risk of not re-letting before Christmas. Swithin had just been\
      let in very badly, but it had served him right\'97he had held on too\
      long.\
\
      He pondered this as he walked steadily, holding his umbrella\
      carefully by the wood, just below the crook of the handle, so as\
      to keep the ferule off the ground, and not fray the silk in the\
      middle. And, with his thin, high shoulders stooped, his long legs\
      moving with swift mechanical precision, this passage through the\
      Park, where the sun shone with a clear flame on so much\
      idleness\'97on so many human evidences of the remorseless battle of\
      Property, raging beyond its ring\'97was like the flight of some land\
      bird across the sea.\
\
      He felt a touch on the arm as he came out at Albert Gate.\
\
      It was Soames, who, crossing from the shady side of Piccadilly,\
      where he had been walking home from the office, had suddenly\
      appeared alongside.\
\
      \'93Your mother\'92s in bed,\'94 said James; \'93I was just coming to you,\
      but I suppose I shall be in the way.\'94\
\
      The outward relations between James and his son were marked by a\
      lack of sentiment peculiarly Forsytean, but for all that the two\
      were by no means unattached. Perhaps they regarded one another as\
      an investment; certainly they were solicitous of each other\'92s\
      welfare, glad of each other\'92s company. They had never exchanged\
      two words upon the more intimate problems of life, or revealed in\
      each other\'92s presence the existence of any deep feeling.\
\
      Something beyond the power of word-analysis bound them together,\
      something hidden deep in the fibre of nations and families\'97for\
      blood, they say, is thicker than water\'97and neither of them was a\
      cold-blooded man. Indeed, in James love of his children was now\
      the prime motive of his existence. To have creatures who were\
      parts of himself, to whom he might transmit the money he saved,\
      was at the root of his saving; and, at seventy-five, what was\
      left that could give him pleasure, but\'97saving? The kernel of life\
      was in this saving for his children.\
\
      Than James Forsyte, notwithstanding all his \'93Jonah-isms,\'94 there\
      was no saner man (if the leading symptom of sanity, as we are\
      told, is self-preservation, though without doubt Timothy went too\
      far) in all this London, of which he owned so much, and loved\
      with such a dumb love, as the centre of his opportunities. He had\
      the marvellous instinctive sanity of the middle class. In\
      him\'97more than in Jolyon, with his masterful will and his moments\
      of tenderness and philosophy\'97more than in Swithin, the martyr to\
      crankiness\'97Nicholas, the sufferer from ability\'97and Roger, the\
      victim of enterprise\'97beat the true pulse of compromise; of all\
      the brothers he was least remarkable in mind and person, and for\
      that reason more likely to live for ever.\
\
      To James, more than to any of the others, was \'93the family\'94\
      significant and dear. There had always been something primitive\
      and cosy in his attitude towards life; he loved the family\
      hearth, he loved gossip, and he loved grumbling. All his\
      decisions were formed of a cream which he skimmed off the family\
      mind; and, through that family, off the minds of thousands of\
      other families of similar fibre. Year after year, week after\
      week, he went to Timothy\'92s, and in his brother\'92s front\
      drawing-room\'97his legs twisted, his long white whiskers framing\
      his clean-shaven mouth\'97would sit watching the family pot simmer,\
      the cream rising to the top; and he would go away sheltered,\
      refreshed, comforted, with an indefinable sense of comfort.\
\
      Beneath the adamant of his self-preserving instinct there was\
      much real softness in James; a visit to Timothy\'92s was like an\
      hour spent in the lap of a mother; and the deep craving he\
      himself had for the protection of the family wing reacted in turn\
      on his feelings towards his own children; it was a nightmare to\
      him to think of them exposed to the treatment of the world, in\
      money, health, or reputation. When his old friend John Street\'92s\
      son volunteered for special service, he shook his head\
      querulously, and wondered what John Street was about to allow it;\
      and when young Street was assagaied, he took it so much to heart\
      that he made a point of calling everywhere with the special\
      object of saying: He knew how it would be\'97he\'92d no patience with\
      them!\
\
      When his son-in-law Dartie had that financial crisis, due to\
      speculation in Oil Shares, James made himself ill worrying over\
      it; the knell of all prosperity seemed to have sounded. It took\
      him three months and a visit to Baden-Baden to get better; there\
      was something terrible in the idea that but for his, James\'92s,\
      money, Dartie\'92s name might have appeared in the Bankruptcy List.\
\
      Composed of a physiological mixture so sound that if he had an\
      earache he thought he was dying, he regarded the occasional\
      ailments of his wife and children as in the nature of personal\
      grievances, special interventions of Providence for the purpose\
      of destroying his peace of mind; but he did not believe at all in\
      the ailments of people outside his own immediate family,\
      affirming them in every case to be due to neglected liver.\
\
      His universal comment was: \'93What can they expect? I have it\
      myself, if I\'92m not careful!\'94\
\
      When he went to Soames\'92s that evening he felt that life was hard\
      on him: There was Emily with a bad toe, and Rachel gadding about\
      in the country; he got no sympathy from anybody; and Ann, she was\
      ill\'97he did not believe she would last through the summer; he had\
      called there three times now without her being able to see him!\
      And this idea of Soames\'92s, building a house, _that_ would have to\
      be looked into. As to the trouble with Irene, he didn\'92t know what\
      was to come of that\'97anything might come of it!\
\
      He entered 62, Montpellier Square with the fullest intentions of\
      being miserable.\
\
      It was already half-past seven, and Irene, dressed for dinner,\
      was seated in the drawing-room. She was wearing her gold-coloured\
      frock\'97for, having been displayed at a dinner-party, a soir\'e9e, and\
      a dance, it was now to be worn at home\'97and she had adorned the\
      bosom with a cascade of lace, on which James\'92s eyes riveted\
      themselves at once.\
\
      \'93Where do you get your things?\'94 he said in an aggravated voice.\
      \'93I never see Rachel and Cicely looking half so well. That\
      rose-point, now\'97that\'92s not real!\'94\
\
      Irene came close, to prove to him that he was in error.\
\
      And, in spite of himself, James felt the influence of her\
      deference, of the faint seductive perfume exhaling from her. No\
      self-respecting Forsyte surrendered at a blow; so he merely said:\
      He didn\'92t know\'97he expected she was spending a pretty penny on\
      dress.\
\
      The gong sounded, and, putting her white arm within his, Irene\
      took him into the dining-room. She seated him in Soames\'92s usual\
      place, round the corner on her left. The light fell softly there,\
      so that he would not be worried by the gradual dying of the day;\
      and she began to talk to him about himself.\
\
      Presently, over James came a change, like the mellowing that\
      steals upon a fruit in the sun; a sense of being caressed, and\
      praised, and petted, and all without the bestowal of a single\
      caress or word of praise. He felt that what he was eating was\
      agreeing with him; he could not get that feeling at home; he did\
      not know when he had enjoyed a glass of champagne so much, and,\
      on inquiring the brand and price, was surprised to find that it\
      was one of which he had a large stock himself, but could never\
      drink; he instantly formed the resolution to let his wine\
      merchant know that he had been swindled.\
\
      Looking up from his food, he remarked:\
\
      \'93You\'92ve a lot of nice things about the place. Now, what did you\
      give for that sugar-sifter? Shouldn\'92t wonder if it was worth\
      money!\'94\
\
      He was particularly pleased with the appearance of a picture, on\
      the wall opposite, which he himself had given them:\
\
      \'93I\'92d no idea it was so good!\'94 he said.\
\
      They rose to go into the drawing-room, and James followed Irene\
      closely.\
\
      \'93That\'92s what I call a capital little dinner,\'94 he murmured,\
      breathing pleasantly down on her shoulder; \'93nothing heavy\'97and not\
      too Frenchified. But _I_ can\'92t get it at home. I pay my cook\
      sixty pounds a year, but _she_ can\'92t give me a dinner like that!\'94\
\
      He had as yet made no allusion to the building of the house, nor\
      did he when Soames, pleading the excuse of business, betook\
      himself to the room at the top, where he kept his pictures.\
\
      James was left alone with his daughter-in-law. The glow of the\
      wine, and of an excellent liqueur, was still within him. He felt\
      quite warm towards her. She was really a taking little thing; she\
      listened to you, and seemed to understand what you were saying;\
      and, while talking, he kept examining her figure, from her\
      bronze-coloured shoes to the waved gold of her hair. She was\
      leaning back in an Empire chair, her shoulders poised against the\
      top\'97her body, flexibly straight and unsupported from the hips,\
      swaying when she moved, as though giving to the arms of a lover.\
      Her lips were smiling, her eyes half-closed.\
\
      It may have been a recognition of danger in the very charm of her\
      attitude, or a twang of digestion, that caused a sudden dumbness\
      to fall on James. He did not remember ever having been quite\
      alone with Irene before. And, as he looked at her, an odd feeling\
      crept over him, as though he had come across something strange\
      and foreign.\
\
      Now what was she thinking about\'97sitting back like that?\
\
      Thus when he spoke it was in a sharper voice, as if he had been\
      awakened from a pleasant dream.\
\
      \'93What d\'92you do with yourself all day?\'94 he said. \'93You never come\
      round to Park Lane!\'94\
\
      She seemed to be making very lame excuses, and James did not look\
      at her. He did not want to believe that she was really avoiding\
      them\'97it would mean too much.\
\
      \'93I expect the fact is, you haven\'92t time,\'94 he said; \'93You\'92re always\
      about with June. I expect you\'92re useful to her with her young\
      man, chaperoning, and one thing and another. They tell me she\'92s\
      never at home now; your Uncle Jolyon he doesn\'92t like it, I fancy,\
      being left so much alone as he is. They tell me she\'92s always\
      hanging about for this young Bosinney; I suppose he comes here\
      every day. Now, what do you think of him? D\'92you think he knows\
      his own mind? He seems to me a poor thing. I should say the grey\
      mare was the better horse!\'94\
\
      The colour deepened in Irene\'92s face; and James watched her\
      suspiciously.\
\
      \'93Perhaps you don\'92t quite understand Mr. Bosinney,\'94 she said.\
\
      \'93Don\'92t understand him!\'94 James hummed out: \'93Why not?\'97you can see\
      he\'92s one of these artistic chaps. They say he\'92s clever\'97they all\
      think they\'92re clever. You know more about him than I do,\'94 he\
      added; and again his suspicious glance rested on her.\
\
      \'93He is designing a house for Soames,\'94 she said softly, evidently\
      trying to smooth things over.\
\
      \'93That brings me to what I was going to say,\'94 continued James; \'93I\
      don\'92t know what Soames wants with a young man like that; why\
      doesn\'92t he go to a first-rate man?\'94\
\
      \'93Perhaps Mr. Bosinney is first-rate!\'94\
\
      James rose, and took a turn with bent head.\
\
      \'93That\'92s it\'92,\'94 he said, \'93you young people, you all stick together;\
      you all think you know best!\'94\
\
      Halting his tall, lank figure before her, he raised a finger, and\
      levelled it at her bosom, as though bringing an indictment\
      against her beauty:\
\
      \'93All I can say is, these artistic people, or whatever they call\
      themselves, they\'92re as unreliable as they can be; and my advice\
      to you is, don\'92t you have too much to do with him!\'94\
\
      Irene smiled; and in the curve of her lips was a strange\
      provocation. She seemed to have lost her deference. Her breast\
      rose and fell as though with secret anger; she drew her hands\
      inwards from their rest on the arms of her chair until the tips\
      of her fingers met, and her dark eyes looked unfathomably at\
      James.\
\
      The latter gloomily scrutinized the floor.\
\
      \'93I tell you my opinion,\'94 he said, \'93it\'92s a pity you haven\'92t got a\
      child to think about, and occupy you!\'94\
\
      A brooding look came instantly on Irene\'92s face, and even James\
      became conscious of the rigidity that took possession of her\
      whole figure beneath the softness of its silk and lace clothing.\
\
      He was frightened by the effect he had produced, and like most\
      men with but little courage, he sought at once to justify himself\
      by bullying.\
\
      \'93You don\'92t seem to care about going about. Why don\'92t you drive\
      down to Hurlingham with us? And go to the theatre now and then.\
      At your time of life you ought to take an interest in things.\
      You\'92re a young woman!\'94\
\
      The brooding look darkened on her face; he grew nervous.\
\
      \'93Well, I know nothing about it,\'94 he said; \'93nobody tells me\
      anything. Soames ought to be able to take care of himself. If he\
      can\'92t take care of himself he mustn\'92t look to me\'97that\'92s all.\'94\
\
      Biting the corner of his forefinger he stole a cold, sharp look\
      at his daughter-in-law.\
\
      He encountered her eyes fixed on his own, so dark and deep, that\
      he stopped, and broke into a gentle perspiration.\
\
      \'93Well, I must be going,\'94 he said after a short pause, and a\
      minute later rose, with a slight appearance of surprise, as\
      though he had expected to be asked to stop. Giving his hand to\
      Irene, he allowed himself to be conducted to the door, and let\
      out into the street. He would not have a cab, he would walk,\
      Irene was to say good-night to Soames for him, and if she wanted\
      a little gaiety, well, he would drive her down to Richmond any\
      day.\
\
      He walked home, and going upstairs, woke Emily out of the first\
      sleep she had had for four and twenty hours, to tell her that it\
      was his impression things were in a bad way at Soames\'92s; on this\
      theme he descanted for half an hour, until at last, saying that\
      he would not sleep a wink, he turned on his side and instantly\
      began to snore.\
\
      In Montpellier Square Soames, who had come from the picture room,\
      stood invisible at the top of the stairs, watching Irene sort the\
      letters brought by the last post. She turned back into the\
      drawing-room; but in a minute came out, and stood as if\
      listening. Then she came stealing up the stairs, with a kitten in\
      her arms. He could see her face bent over the little beast, which\
      was purring against her neck. Why couldn\'92t she look at him like\
      that?\
\
      Suddenly she saw him, and her face changed.\
\
      \'93Any letters for me?\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93Three.\'94\
\
      He stood aside, and without another word she passed on into the\
      bedroom.\
\
\
      CHAPTER VII OLD JOLYON\'92S PECCADILLO\
\
      Old Jolyon came out of Lord\'92s cricket ground that same afternoon\
      with the intention of going home. He had not reached Hamilton\
      Terrace before he changed his mind, and hailing a cab, gave the\
      driver an address in Wistaria Avenue. He had taken a resolution.\
\
      June had hardly been at home at all that week; she had given him\
      nothing of her company for a long time past, not, in fact, since\
      she had become engaged to Bosinney. He never asked her for her\
      company. It was not his habit to ask people for things! She had\
      just that one idea now\'97Bosinney and his affairs\'97and she left him\
      stranded in his great house, with a parcel of servants, and not a\
      soul to speak to from morning to night. His Club was closed for\
      cleaning; his Boards in recess; there was nothing, therefore, to\
      take him into the City. June had wanted him to go away; she would\
      not go herself, because Bosinney was in London.\
\
      But where was he to go by himself? He could not go abroad alone;\
      the sea upset his liver; he hated hotels. Roger went to a\
      hydropathic\'97he was not going to begin that at his time of life,\
      those new-fangled places were all humbug!\
\
      With such formulas he clothed to himself the desolation of his\
      spirit; the lines down his face deepening, his eyes day by day\
      looking forth with the melancholy which sat so strangely on a\
      face wont to be strong and serene.\
\
      And so that afternoon he took this journey through St. John\'92s\
      Wood, in the golden-light that sprinkled the rounded green bushes\
      of the acacia\'92s before the little houses, in the summer sunshine\
      that seemed holding a revel over the little gardens; and he\
      looked about him with interest; for this was a district which no\
      Forsyte entered without open disapproval and secret curiosity.\
\
      His cab stopped in front of a small house of that peculiar buff\
      colour which implies a long immunity from paint. It had an outer\
      gate, and a rustic approach.\
\
      He stepped out, his bearing extremely composed; his massive head,\
      with its drooping moustache and wings of white hair, very\
      upright, under an excessively large top hat; his glance firm, a\
      little angry. He had been driven into this!\
\
      \'93Mrs. Jolyon Forsyte at home?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, yes sir!\'97what name shall I say, if you please, sir?\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon could not help twinkling at the little maid as he gave\
      his name. She seemed to him such a funny little toad!\
\
      And he followed her through the dark hall, into a small double,\
      drawing-room, where the furniture was covered in chintz, and the\
      little maid placed him in a chair.\
\
      \'93They\'92re all in the garden, sir; if you\'92ll kindly take a seat,\
      I\'92ll tell them.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon sat down in the chintz-covered chair, and looked\
      around him. The whole place seemed to him, as he would have\
      expressed it, pokey; there was a certain\'97he could not tell\
      exactly what\'97air of shabbiness, or rather of making two ends\
      meet, about everything. As far as he could see, not a single\
      piece of furniture was worth a five-pound note. The walls,\
      distempered rather a long time ago, were decorated with\
      water-colour sketches; across the ceiling meandered a long crack.\
\
      These little houses were all old, second-rate concerns; he should\
      hope the rent was under a hundred a year; it hurt him more than\
      he could have said, to think of a Forsyte\'97his own son living in\
      such a place.\
\
      The little maid came back. Would he please to go down into the\
      garden?\
\
      Old Jolyon marched out through the French windows. In descending\
      the steps he noticed that they wanted painting.\
\
      Young Jolyon, his wife, his two children, and his dog Balthasar,\
      were all out there under a pear-tree.\
\
      This walk towards them was the most courageous act of old\
      Jolyon\'92s life; but no muscle of his face moved, no nervous\
      gesture betrayed him. He kept his deep-set eyes steadily on the\
      enemy.\
\
      In those two minutes he demonstrated to perfection all that\
      unconscious soundness, balance, and vitality of fibre that made,\
      of him and so many others of his class the core of the nation. In\
      the unostentatious conduct of their own affairs, to the neglect\
      of everything else, they typified the essential individualism,\
      born in the Briton from the natural isolation of his country\'92s\
      life.\
\
      The dog Balthasar sniffed round the edges of his trousers; this\
      friendly and cynical mongrel\'97offspring of a liaison between a\
      Russian poodle and a fox-terrier\'97had a nose for the unusual.\
\
      The strange greetings over, old Jolyon seated himself in a wicker\
      chair, and his two grandchildren, one on each side of his knees,\
      looked at him silently, never having seen so old a man.\
\
      They were unlike, as though recognising the difference set\
      between them by the circumstances of their births. Jolly, the\
      child of sin, pudgy-faced, with his tow-coloured hair brushed off\
      his forehead, and a dimple in his chin, had an air of stubborn\
      amiability, and the eyes of a Forsyte; little Holly, the child of\
      wedlock, was a dark-skinned, solemn soul, with her mother\'92s grey\
      and wistful eyes.\
\
      The dog Balthasar, having walked round the three small\
      flower-beds, to show his extreme contempt for things at large,\
      had also taken a seat in front of old Jolyon, and, oscillating a\
      tail curled by Nature tightly over his back, was staring up with\
      eyes that did not blink.\
\
      Even in the garden, that sense of things being pokey haunted old\
      Jolyon; the wicker chair creaked under his weight; the\
      garden-beds looked \'93daverdy\'94. On the far side, under the\
      smut-stained wall, cats had made a path.\
\
      While he and his grandchildren thus regarded each other with the\
      peculiar scrutiny, curious yet trustful, that passes between the\
      very young and the very old, young Jolyon watched his wife.\
\
      The colour had deepened in her thin, oval face, with its straight\
      brows, and large, grey eyes. Her hair, brushed in fine, high\
      curves back from her forehead, was going grey, like his own, and\
      this greyness made the sudden vivid colour in her cheeks\
      painfully pathetic.\
\
      The look on her face, such as he had never seen there before,\
      such as she had always hidden from him, was full of secret\
      resentments, and longings, and fears. Her eyes, under their\
      twitching brows, stared painfully. And she was silent.\
\
      Jolly alone sustained the conversation; he had many possessions,\
      and was anxious that his unknown friend with extremely large\
      moustaches, and hands all covered with blue veins, who sat with\
      legs crossed like his own father (a habit he was himself trying\
      to acquire), should know it; but being a Forsyte, though not yet\
      quite eight years old, he made no mention of the thing at the\
      moment dearest to his heart\'97a camp of soldiers in a shop-window,\
      which his father had promised to buy. No doubt it seemed to him\
      too precious; a tempting of Providence to mention it yet.\
\
      And the sunlight played through the leaves on that little party\
      of the three generations grouped tranquilly under the pear-tree,\
      which had long borne no fruit.\
\
      Old Jolyon\'92s furrowed face was reddening patchily, as old men\'92s\
      faces redden in the sun. He took one of Jolly\'92s hands in his own;\
      the boy climbed on to his knee; and little Holly, mesmerized by\
      this sight, crept up to them; the sound of the dog Balthasar\'92s\
      scratching arose rhythmically.\
\
      Suddenly young Mrs. Jolyon got up and hurried indoors. A minute\
      later her husband muttered an excuse, and followed. Old Jolyon\
      was left alone with his grandchildren.\
\
      And Nature with her quaint irony began working in him one of her\
      strange revolutions, following her cyclic laws into the depths of\
      his heart. And that tenderness for little children, that passion\
      for the beginnings of life which had once made him forsake his\
      son and follow June, now worked in him to forsake June and follow\
      these littler things. Youth, like a flame, burned ever in his\
      breast, and to youth he turned, to the round little limbs, so\
      reckless, that wanted care, to the small round faces so\
      unreasonably solemn or bright, to the treble tongues, and the\
      shrill, chuckling laughter, to the insistent tugging hands, and\
      the feel of small bodies against his legs, to all that was young\
      and young, and once more young. And his eyes grew soft, his\
      voice, and thin-veined hands soft, and soft his heart within him.\
      And to those small creatures he became at once a place of\
      pleasure, a place where they were secure, and could talk and\
      laugh and play; till, like sunshine, there radiated from old\
      Jolyon\'92s wicker chair the perfect gaiety of three hearts.\
\
      But with young Jolyon following to his wife\'92s room it was\
      different.\
\
      He found her seated on a chair before her dressing-glass, with\
      her hands before her face.\
\
      Her shoulders were shaking with sobs. This passion of hers for\
      suffering was mysterious to him. He had been through a hundred of\
      these moods; how he had survived them he never knew, for he could\
      never believe they _were_ moods, and that the last hour of his\
      partnership had not struck.\
\
      In the night she would be sure to throw her arms round his neck\
      and say: \'93Oh! Jo, how I make you suffer!\'94 as she had done a\
      hundred times before.\
\
      He reached out his hand, and, unseen, slipped his razor-case into\
      his pocket. \'93I cannot stay here,\'94 he thought, \'93I must go down!\'94\
      Without a word he left the room, and went back to the lawn.\
\
      Old Jolyon had little Holly on his knee; she had taken possession\
      of his watch; Jolly, very red in the face, was trying to show\
      that he could stand on his head. The dog Balthasar, as close as\
      he might be to the tea-table, had fixed his eyes on the cake.\
\
      Young Jolyon felt a malicious desire to cut their enjoyment\
      short.\
\
      What business had his father to come and upset his wife like\
      this? It was a shock, after all these years! He ought to have\
      known; he ought to have given them warning; but when did a\
      Forsyte ever imagine that his conduct could upset anybody! And in\
      his thoughts he did old Jolyon wrong.\
\
      He spoke sharply to the children, and told them to go in to their\
      tea. Greatly surprised, for they had never heard their father\
      speak sharply before, they went off, hand in hand, little Holly\
      looking back over her shoulder.\
\
      Young Jolyon poured out the tea.\
\
      \'93My wife\'92s not the thing today,\'94 he said, but he knew well enough\
      that his father had penetrated the cause of that sudden\
      withdrawal, and almost hated the old man for sitting there so\
      calmly.\
\
      \'93You\'92ve got a nice little house here,\'94 said old Jolyon with a\
      shrewd look; \'93I suppose you\'92ve taken a lease of it!\'94\
\
      Young Jolyon nodded.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t like the neighbourhood,\'94 said old Jolyon; \'93a ramshackle\
      lot.\'94\
\
      Young Jolyon replied: \'93Yes, we\'92re a ramshackle lot.\'94\
\
      The silence was now only broken by the sound of the dog\
      Balthasar\'92s scratching.\
\
      Old Jolyon said simply: \'93I suppose I oughtn\'92t to have come here,\
      Jo; but I get so lonely!\'94\
\
      At these words young Jolyon got up and put his hand on his\
      father\'92s shoulder.\
\
      In the next house someone was playing over and over again: \'93La\
      Donna \'e8 mobile\'94 on an untuned piano; and the little garden had\
      fallen into shade, the sun now only reached the wall at the end,\
      whereon basked a crouching cat, her yellow eyes turned sleepily\
      down on the dog Balthasar. There was a drowsy hum of very distant\
      traffic; the creepered trellis round the garden shut out\
      everything but sky, and house, and pear-tree, with its top\
      branches still gilded by the sun.\
\
      For some time they sat there, talking but little. Then old Jolyon\
      rose to go, and not a word was said about his coming again.\
\
      He walked away very sadly. What a poor miserable place; and he\
      thought of the great, empty house in Stanhope Gate, fit residence\
      for a Forsyte, with its huge billiard-room and drawing-room that\
      no one entered from one week\'92s end to another.\
\
      That woman, whose face he had rather liked, was too thin-skinned\
      by half; she gave Jo a bad time he knew! And those sweet\
      children! Ah! what a piece of awful folly!\
\
      He walked towards the Edgware Road, between rows of little\
      houses, all suggesting to him (erroneously no doubt, but the\
      prejudices of a Forsyte are sacred) shady histories of some sort\
      or kind.\
\
      Society, forsooth, the chattering hags and jackanapes\'97had set\
      themselves up to pass judgment on _his_ flesh and blood! A parcel\
      of old women! He stumped his umbrella on the ground, as though to\
      drive it into the heart of that unfortunate body, which had dared\
      to ostracize his son and his son\'92s son, in whom he could have\
      lived again!\
\
      He stumped his umbrella fiercely; yet he himself had followed\
      Society\'92s behaviour for fifteen years\'97had only today been false\
      to it!\
\
      He thought of June, and her dead mother, and the whole story,\
      with all his old bitterness. A wretched business!\
\
      He was a long time reaching Stanhope Gate, for, with native\
      perversity, being extremely tired, he walked the whole way.\
\
      After washing his hands in the lavatory downstairs, he went to\
      the dining-room to wait for dinner, the only room he used when\
      June was out\'97it was less lonely so. The evening paper had not yet\
      come; he had finished the Times, there was therefore nothing to\
      do.\
\
      The room faced the backwater of traffic, and was very silent. He\
      disliked dogs, but a dog even would have been company. His gaze,\
      travelling round the walls, rested on a picture entitled: \'93Group\
      of Dutch fishing boats at sunset\'94; the _chef d\'92\'9cuvre_ of his\
      collection. It gave him no pleasure. He closed his eyes. He was\
      lonely! He oughtn\'92t to complain, he knew, but he couldn\'92t help\
      it: He was a poor thing\'97had always been a poor thing\'97no pluck!\
      Such was his thought.\
\
      The butler came to lay the table for dinner, and seeing his\
      master apparently asleep, exercised extreme caution in his\
      movements. This bearded man also wore a moustache, which had\
      given rise to grave doubts in the minds of many members\'97of the\
      family\'97, especially those who, like Soames, had been to public\
      schools, and were accustomed to niceness in such matters. Could\
      he really be considered a butler? Playful spirits alluded to him\
      as: \'93Uncle Jolyon\'92s Nonconformist\'94. George, the acknowledged wag,\
      had named him: \'93Sankey.\'94\
\
      He moved to and fro between the great polished sideboard and the\
      great polished table inimitably sleek and soft.\
\
      Old Jolyon watched him, feigning sleep. The fellow was a sneak\'97he\
      had always thought so\'97who cared about nothing but rattling\
      through his work, and getting out to his betting or his woman or\
      goodness knew what! A slug! Fat too! And didn\'92t care a pin about\
      his master!\
\
      But then against his will, came one of those moments of\
      philosophy which made old Jolyon different from other Forsytes:\
\
      After all why should the man care? He wasn\'92t paid to care, and\
      why expect it? In this world people couldn\'92t look for affection\
      unless they paid for it. It might be different in the next\'97he\
      didn\'92t know\'97couldn\'92t tell! And again he shut his eyes.\
\
      Relentless and stealthy, the butler pursued his labours, taking\
      things from the various compartments of the sideboard. His back\
      seemed always turned to old Jolyon; thus, he robbed his\
      operations of the unseemliness of being carried on in his\
      master\'92s presence; now and then he furtively breathed on the\
      silver, and wiped it with a piece of chamois leather. He appeared\
      to pore over the quantities of wine in the decanters, which he\
      carried carefully and rather high, letting his head droop over\
      them protectingly. When he had finished, he stood for over a\
      minute watching his master, and in his greenish eyes there was a\
      look of contempt:\
\
      After all, this master of his was an old buffer, who hadn\'92t much\
      left in him!\
\
      Soft as a tom-cat, he crossed the room to press the bell. His\
      orders were \'93dinner at seven.\'94 What if his master were asleep; he\
      would soon have him out of that; there was the night to sleep in!\
      He had himself to think of, for he was due at his Club at\
      half-past eight!\
\
      In answer to the ring, appeared a page boy with a silver soup\
      tureen. The butler took it from his hands and placed it on the\
      table, then, standing by the open door, as though about to usher\
      company into the room, he said in a solemn voice:\
\
      \'93Dinner is on the table, sir!\'94\
\
      Slowly old Jolyon got up out of his chair, and sat down at the\
      table to eat his dinner.\
\
\
      CHAPTER VIII PLANS OF THE HOUSE\
\
      Forsytes, as is generally admitted, have shells, like that\
      extremely useful little animal which is made into Turkish\
      delight, in other words, they are never seen, or if seen would\
      not be recognised, without habitats, composed of circumstance,\
      property, acquaintances, and wives, which seem to move along with\
      them in their passage through a world composed of thousands of\
      other Forsytes with their habitats. Without a habitat a Forsyte\
      is inconceivable\'97he would be like a novel without a plot, which\
      is well-known to be an anomaly.\
\
      To Forsyte eyes Bosinney appeared to have no habitat, he seemed\
      one of those rare and unfortunate men who go through life\
      surrounded by circumstance, property, acquaintances, and wives\
      that do not belong to them.\
\
      His rooms in Sloane Street, on the top floor, outside which, on a\
      plate, was his name, \'93Philip Baynes Bosinney, Architect,\'94 were\
      not those of a Forsyte. He had no sitting-room apart from his\
      office, but a large recess had been screened off to conceal the\
      necessaries of life\'97a couch, an easy chair, his pipes, spirit\
      case, novels and slippers. The business part of the room had the\
      usual furniture; an open cupboard with pigeon-holes, a round oak\
      table, a folding wash-stand, some hard chairs, a standing desk of\
      large dimensions covered with drawings and designs. June had\
      twice been to tea there under the chaperonage of his aunt.\
\
      He was believed to have a bedroom at the back.\
\
      As far as the family had been able to ascertain his income, it\
      consisted of two consulting appointments at twenty pounds a year,\
      together with an odd fee once in a way, and\'97more worthy item\'97a\
      private annuity under his father\'92s will of one hundred and fifty\
      pounds a year.\
\
      What had transpired concerning that father was not so reassuring.\
      It appeared that he had been a Lincolnshire country doctor of\
      Cornish extraction, striking appearance, and Byronic tendencies\'97a\
      well-known figure, in fact, in his county. Bosinney\'92s uncle by\
      marriage, Baynes, of Baynes and Bildeboy, a Forsyte in instincts\
      if not in name, had but little that was worthy to relate of his\
      brother-in-law.\
\
      \'93An odd fellow!\'94 he would say: \'93always spoke of his three eldest\
      boys as \'91good creatures, but so dull\'92; they\'92re all doing\
      capitally in the Indian Civil! Philip was the only one _he_\
      liked. I\'92ve heard him talk in the queerest way; he once said to\
      me: \'91My dear fellow, never let your poor wife know what you\'92re\
      thinking of!\'92 But I didn\'92t follow his advice; not I! An eccentric\
      man! He would say to Phil: \'91Whether you live like a gentleman or\
      not, my boy, be sure you die like one!\'92 and he had himself\
      embalmed in a frock coat suit, with a satin cravat and a diamond\
      pin. Oh, quite an original, I can assure you!\'94\
\
      Of Bosinney himself Baynes would speak warmly, with a certain\
      compassion: \'93He\'92s got a streak of his father\'92s Byronism. Why,\
      look at the way he threw up his chances when he left my office;\
      going off like that for six months with a knapsack, and all for\
      what?\'97to study foreign architecture\'97foreign! What could he\
      expect? And there he is\'97a clever young fellow\'97doesn\'92t make his\
      hundred a year! Now this engagement is the best thing that could\
      have happened\'97keep him steady; he\'92s one of those that go to bed\
      all day and stay up all night, simply because they\'92ve no method;\
      but no vice about him\'97not an ounce of vice. Old Forsyte\'92s a rich\
      man!\'94\
\
      Mr. Baynes made himself extremely pleasant to June, who\
      frequently visited his house in Lowndes Square at this period.\
\
      \'93This house of your cousin\'92s\'97what a capital man of business\'97is\
      the very thing for Philip,\'94 he would say to her; \'93you mustn\'92t\
      expect to see too much of him just now, my dear young lady. The\
      good cause\'97the good cause! The young man must make his way. When\
      I was his age I was at work day and night. My dear wife used to\
      say to me, \'91Bobby, don\'92t work too hard, think of your health\'92;\
      but I never spared myself!\'94\
\
      June had complained that her lover found no time to come to\
      Stanhope Gate.\
\
      The first time he came again they had not been together a quarter\
      of an hour before, by one of those coincidences of which she was\
      a mistress, Mrs. Septimus Small arrived. Thereon Bosinney rose\
      and hid himself, according to previous arrangement, in the little\
      study, to wait for her departure.\
\
      \'93My dear,\'94 said Aunt Juley, \'93how thin he is! I\'92ve often noticed\
      it with engaged people; but you mustn\'92t let it get worse. There\'92s\
      Barlow\'92s extract of veal; it did your Uncle Swithin a lot of\
      good.\'94\
\
      June, her little figure erect before the hearth, her small face\
      quivering grimly, for she regarded her aunt\'92s untimely visit in\
      the light of a personal injury, replied with scorn:\
\
      \'93It\'92s because he\'92s busy; people who can do anything worth doing\
      are never fat!\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley pouted; she herself had always been thin, but the only\
      pleasure she derived from the fact was the opportunity of longing\
      to be stouter.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t think,\'94 she said mournfully, \'93that you ought to let them\
      call him \'91The Buccaneer\'92; people might think it odd, now that\
      he\'92s going to build a house for Soames. I do hope he will be\
      careful; it\'92s so important for him. Soames has such good taste!\'94\
\
      \'93Taste!\'94 cried June, flaring up at once; \'93wouldn\'92t give that for\
      his taste, or any of the family\'92s!\'94\
\
      Mrs. Small was taken aback.\
\
      \'93Your Uncle Swithin,\'94 she said, \'93always had beautiful taste! And\
      Soames\'92s little house is lovely; you don\'92t mean to say you don\'92t\
      think so!\'94\
\
      \'93H\'92mph!\'94 said June, \'93that\'92s only because Irene\'92s there!\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley tried to say something pleasant:\
\
      \'93And how will dear Irene like living in the country?\'94\
\
      June gazed at her intently, with a look in her eyes as if her\
      conscience had suddenly leaped up into them; it passed; and an\
      even more intent look took its place, as if she had stared that\
      conscience out of countenance. She replied imperiously:\
\
      \'93Of course she\'92ll like it; why shouldn\'92t she?\'94\
\
      Mrs. Small grew nervous.\
\
      \'93I didn\'92t know,\'94 she said; \'93I thought she mightn\'92t like to leave\
      her friends. Your Uncle James says she doesn\'92t take enough\
      interest in life. _We_ think\'97I mean Timothy thinks\'97she ought to\
      go out more. I expect you\'92ll miss her very much!\'94\
\
      June clasped her hands behind her neck.\
\
      \'93I do wish,\'94 she cried, \'93Uncle Timothy wouldn\'92t talk about what\
      doesn\'92t concern him!\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley rose to the full height of her tall figure.\
\
      \'93He never talks about what doesn\'92t concern him,\'94 she said.\
\
      June was instantly compunctious; she ran to her aunt and kissed\
      her.\
\
      \'93I\'92m very sorry, auntie; but I wish they\'92d let Irene alone.\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley, unable to think of anything further on the subject\
      that would be suitable, was silent; she prepared for departure,\
      hooking her black silk cape across her chest, and, taking up her\
      green reticule:\
\
      \'93And how is your dear grandfather?\'94 she asked in the hall, \'93I\
      expect he\'92s very lonely now that all your time is taken up with\
      Mr. Bosinney.\'94\
\
      She bent and kissed her niece hungrily, and with little, mincing\
      steps passed away.\
\
      The tears sprang up in Jun\'92s eyes; running into the little study,\
      where Bosinney was sitting at the table drawing birds on the back\
      of an envelope, she sank down by his side and cried:\
\
      \'93Oh, Phil! it\'92s all so horrid!\'94 Her heart was as warm as the\
      colour of her hair.\
\
      On the following Sunday morning, while Soames was shaving, a\
      message was brought him to the effect that Mr. Bosinney was\
      below, and would be glad to see him. Opening the door into his\
      wife\'92s room, he said:\
\
      \'93Bosinney\'92s downstairs. Just go and entertain him while I finish\
      shaving. I\'92ll be down in a minute. It\'92s about the plans, I\
      expect.\'94\
\
      Irene looked at him, without reply, put the finishing touch to\
      her dress and went downstairs. He could not make her out about\
      this house. She had said nothing against it, and, as far as\
      Bosinney was concerned, seemed friendly enough.\
\
      From the window of his dressing-room he could see them talking\
      together in the little court below. He hurried on with his\
      shaving, cutting his chin twice. He heard them laugh, and thought\
      to himself: \'93Well, they get on all right, anyway!\'94\
\
      As he expected, Bosinney had come round to fetch him to look at\
      the plans.\
\
      He took his hat and went over.\
\
      The plans were spread on the oak table in the architect\'92s room;\
      and pale, imperturbable, inquiring, Soames bent over them for a\
      long time without speaking.\
\
      He said at last in a puzzled voice:\
\
      \'93It\'92s an odd sort of house!\'94\
\
      A rectangular house of two stories was designed in a quadrangle\
      round a covered-in court. This court, encircled by a gallery on\
      the upper floor, was roofed with a glass roof, supported by eight\
      columns running up from the ground.\
\
      It was indeed, to Forsyte eyes, an odd house.\
\
      \'93There\'92s a lot of room cut to waste,\'94 pursued Soames.\
\
      Bosinney began to walk about, and Soames did not like the\
      expression on his face.\
\
      \'93The principle of this house,\'94 said the architect, \'93was that you\
      should have room to breathe\'97like a gentleman!\'94\
\
      Soames extended his finger and thumb, as if measuring the extent\
      of the distinction he should acquire; and replied:\
\
      \'93Oh! yes; I see.\'94\
\
      The peculiar look came into Bosinney\'92s face which marked all his\
      enthusiasms.\
\
      \'93I\'92ve tried to plan you a house here with some self-respect of\
      its own. If you don\'92t like it, you\'92d better say so. It\'92s\
      certainly the last thing to be considered\'97who wants self-respect\
      in a house, when you can squeeze in an extra lavatory?\'94 He put\
      his finger suddenly down on the left division of the centre\
      oblong: \'93You can swing a cat here. This is for your pictures,\
      divided from this court by curtains; draw them back and you\'92ll\
      have a space of fifty-one by twenty-three six. This double-faced\
      stove in the centre, here, looks one way towards the court, one\
      way towards the picture room; this end wall is all window; you\'92ve\
      a southeast light from that, a north light from the court. The\
      rest of your pictures you can hang round the gallery upstairs, or\
      in the other rooms.\'94 \'93In architecture,\'94 he went on\'97and though\
      looking at Soames he did not seem to see him, which gave Soames\
      an unpleasant feeling\'97\'93as in life, you\'92ll get no self-respect\
      without regularity. Fellows tell you that\'92s old fashioned. It\
      appears to be peculiar any way; it never occurs to us to embody\
      the main principle of life in our buildings; we load our houses\
      with decoration, gimcracks, corners, anything to distract the\
      eye. On the contrary the eye should rest; get your effects with a\
      few strong lines. The whole thing is regularity\'97there\'92s no\
      self-respect without it.\'94\
\
      Soames, the unconscious ironist, fixed his gaze on Bosinney\'92s\
      tie, which was far from being in the perpendicular; he was\
      unshaven too, and his dress not remarkable for order.\
      Architecture appeared to have exhausted his regularity.\
\
      \'93Won\'92t it look like a barrack?\'94 he inquired.\
\
      He did not at once receive a reply.\
\
      \'93I can see what it is,\'94 said Bosinney, \'93you want one of\
      Littlemaster\'92s houses\'97one of the pretty and commodious sort,\
      where the servants will live in garrets, and the front door be\
      sunk so that you may come up again. By all means try\
      Littlemaster, you\'92ll find him a capital fellow, I\'92ve known him\
      all my life!\'94\
\
      Soames was alarmed. He had really been struck by the plans, and\
      the concealment of his satisfaction had been merely instinctive.\
      It was difficult for him to pay a compliment. He despised people\
      who were lavish with their praises.\
\
      He found himself now in the embarrassing position of one who must\
      pay a compliment or run the risk of losing a good thing. Bosinney\
      was just the fellow who might tear up the plans and refuse to act\
      for him; a kind of grown-up child!\
\
      This grown-up childishness, to which he felt so superior,\
      exercised a peculiar and almost mesmeric effect on Soames, for he\
      had never felt anything like it in himself.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he stammered at last, \'93it\'92s\'97it\'92s, certainly original.\'94\
\
      He had such a private distrust and even dislike of the word\
      \'93original\'94 that he felt he had not really given himself away by\
      this remark.\
\
      Bosinney seemed pleased. It was the sort of thing that would\
      please a fellow like that! And his success encouraged Soames.\
\
      \'93It\'92s\'97a big place,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93Space, air, light,\'94 he heard Bosinney murmur, \'93you can\'92t live\
      like a gentleman in one of Littlemaster\'92s\'97he builds for\
      manufacturers.\'94\
\
      Soames made a deprecating movement; he had been identified with a\
      gentleman; not for a good deal of money now would he be classed\
      with manufacturers. But his innate distrust of general principles\
      revived. What the deuce was the good of talking about regularity\
      and self-respect? It looked to him as if the house would be cold.\
\
      \'93Irene can\'92t stand the cold!\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 said Bosinney sarcastically. \'93Your wife? She doesn\'92t like\
      the cold? I\'92ll see to that; she shan\'92t be cold. Look here!\'94 he\
      pointed, to four marks at regular intervals on the walls of the\
      court. \'93I\'92ve given you hot-water pipes in aluminium casings; you\
      can get them with very good designs.\'94\
\
      Soames looked suspiciously at these marks.\
\
      \'93It\'92s all very well, all this,\'94 he said, \'93but what\'92s it going to\
      cost?\'94\
\
      The architect took a sheet of paper from his pocket:\
\
      \'93The house, of course, should be built entirely of stone, but, as\
      I thought you wouldn\'92t stand that, I\'92ve compromised for a facing.\
      It ought to have a copper roof, but I\'92ve made it green slate. As\
      it is, including metal work, it\'92ll cost you eight thousand five\
      hundred.\'94\
\
      \'93Eight thousand five hundred?\'94 said Soames. \'93Why, I gave you an\
      outside limit of eight!\'94\
\
      \'93Can\'92t be done for a penny less,\'94 replied Bosinney coolly.\
\
      \'93You must take it or leave it!\'94\
\
      It was the only way, probably, that such a proposition could have\
      been made to Soames. He was nonplussed. Conscience told him to\
      throw the whole thing up. But the design was good, and he knew\
      it\'97there was completeness about it, and dignity; the servants\'92\
      apartments were excellent too. He would gain credit by living in\
      a house like that\'97with such individual features, yet perfectly\
      well-arranged.\
\
      He continued poring over the plans, while Bosinney went into his\
      bedroom to shave and dress.\
\
      The two walked back to Montpellier Square in silence, Soames\
      watching him out of the corner of his eye.\
\
      The Buccaneer was rather a good-looking fellow\'97so he thought\'97when\
      he was properly got up.\
\
      Irene was bending over her flowers when the two men came in.\
\
      She spoke of sending across the Park to fetch June.\
\
      \'93No, no,\'94 said Soames, \'93we\'92ve still got business to talk over!\'94\
\
      At lunch he was almost cordial, and kept pressing Bosinney to\
      eat. He was pleased to see the architect in such high spirits,\
      and left him to spend the afternoon with Irene, while he stole\
      off to his pictures, after his Sunday habit. At tea-time he came\
      down to the drawing-room, and found them talking, as he expressed\
      it, nineteen to the dozen.\
\
      Unobserved in the doorway, he congratulated himself that things\
      were taking the right turn. It was lucky she and Bosinney got on;\
      she seemed to be falling into line with the idea of the new\
      house.\
\
      Quiet meditation among his pictures had decided him to spring the\
      five hundred if necessary; but he hoped that the afternoon might\
      have softened Bosinney\'92s estimates. It was so purely a matter\
      which Bosinney could remedy if he liked; there must be a dozen\
      ways in which he could cheapen the production of a house without\
      spoiling the effect.\
\
      He awaited, therefore, his opportunity till Irene was handing the\
      architect his first cup of tea. A chink of sunshine through the\
      lace of the blinds warmed her cheek, shone in the gold of her\
      hair, and in her soft eyes. Possibly the same gleam deepened\
      Bosinney\'92s colour, gave the rather startled look to his face.\
\
      Soames hated sunshine, and he at once got up, to draw the blind.\
      Then he took his own cup of tea from his wife, and said, more\
      coldly than he had intended:\
\
      \'93Can\'92t you see your way to do it for eight thousand after all?\
      There must be a lot of little things you could alter.\'94\
\
      Bosinney drank off his tea at a gulp, put down his cup, and\
      answered:\
\
      \'93Not one!\'94\
\
      Soames saw that his suggestion had touched some unintelligible\
      point of personal vanity.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he agreed, with sulky resignation; \'93you must have it your\
      own way, I suppose.\'94\
\
      A few minutes later Bosinney rose to go, and Soames rose too, to\
      see him off the premises. The architect seemed in absurdly high\
      spirits. After watching him walk away at a swinging pace, Soames\
      returned moodily to the drawing-room, where Irene was putting\
      away the music, and, moved by an uncontrollable spasm of\
      curiosity, he asked:\
\
      \'93Well, what do you think of \'91The Buccaneer\'92?\'94\
\
      He looked at the carpet while waiting for her answer, and he had\
      to wait some time.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know,\'94 she said at last.\
\
      \'93Do you think he\'92s good-looking?\'94\
\
      Irene smiled. And it seemed to Soames that she was mocking him.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 she answered; \'93very.\'94\
\
\
      CHAPTER IX DEATH OF AUNT ANN\
\
      There came a morning at the end of September when Aunt Ann was\
      unable to take from Smither\'92s hands the insignia of personal\
      dignity. After one look at the old face, the doctor, hurriedly\
      sent for, announced that Miss Forsyte had passed away in her\
      sleep.\
\
      Aunts Juley and Hester were overwhelmed by the shock. They had\
      never imagined such an ending. Indeed, it is doubtful whether\
      they had ever realized that an ending was bound to come. Secretly\
      they felt it unreasonable of Ann to have left them like this\
      without a word, without even a struggle. It was unlike her.\
\
      Perhaps what really affected them so profoundly was the thought\
      that a Forsyte should have let go her grasp on life. If one, then\
      why not all!\
\
      It was a full hour before they could make up their minds to tell\
      Timothy. If only it could be kept from him! If only it could be\
      broken to him by degrees!\
\
      And long they stood outside his door whispering together. And\
      when it was over they whispered together again.\
\
      He would feel it more, they were afraid, as time went on. Still,\
      he had taken it better than could have been expected. He would\
      keep his bed, of course!\
\
      They separated, crying quietly.\
\
      Aunt Juley stayed in her room, prostrated by the blow. Her face,\
      discoloured by tears, was divided into compartments by the little\
      ridges of pouting flesh which had swollen with emotion. It was\
      impossible to conceive of life without Ann, who had lived with\
      her for seventy-three years, broken only by the short interregnum\
      of her married life, which seemed now so unreal. At fixed\
      intervals she went to her drawer, and took from beneath the\
      lavender bags a fresh pocket-handkerchief. Her warm heart could\
      not bear the thought that Ann was lying there so cold.\
\
      Aunt Hester, the silent, the patient, that backwater of the\
      family energy, sat in the drawing-room, where the blinds were\
      drawn; and she, too, had wept at first, but quietly, without\
      visible effect. Her guiding principle, the conservation of\
      energy, did not abandon her in sorrow. She sat, slim, motionless,\
      studying the grate, her hands idle in the lap of her black silk\
      dress. They would want to rouse her into doing something, no\
      doubt. As if there were any good in that! Doing something would\
      not bring back Ann! Why worry her?\
\
      Five o\'92clock brought three of the brothers, Jolyon and James and\
      Swithin; Nicholas was at Yarmouth, and Roger had a bad attack of\
      gout. Mrs. Hayman had been by herself earlier in the day, and,\
      after seeing Ann, had gone away, leaving a message for\
      Timothy\'97which was kept from him\'97that she ought to have been told\
      sooner. In fact, there was a feeling amongst them all that they\
      ought to have been told sooner, as though they had missed\
      something; and James said:\
\
      \'93I knew how it\'92d be; I told you she wouldn\'92t last through the\
      summer.\'94\
\
      Aunt Hester made no reply; it was nearly October, but what was\
      the good of arguing; some people were never satisfied.\
\
      She sent up to tell her sister that the brothers were there. Mrs.\
      Small came down at once. She had bathed her face, which was still\
      swollen, and though she looked severely at Swithin\'92s trousers,\
      for they were of light blue\'97he had come straight from the club,\
      where the news had reached him\'97she wore a more cheerful\
      expression than usual, the instinct for doing the wrong thing\
      being even now too strong for her.\
\
      Presently all five went up to look at the body. Under the pure\
      white sheet a quilted counter-pane had been placed, for now, more\
      than ever, Aunt Ann had need of warmth; and, the pillows removed,\
      her spine and head rested flat, with the semblance of their\
      life-long inflexibility; the coif banding the top of her brow was\
      drawn on either side to the level of the ears, and between it and\
      the sheet her face, almost as white, was turned with closed eyes\
      to the faces of her brothers and sisters. In its extraordinary\
      peace the face was stronger than ever, nearly all bone now under\
      the scarce-wrinkled parchment of skin\'97square jaw and chin,\
      cheekbones, forehead with hollow temples, chiselled nose\'97the\
      fortress of an unconquerable spirit that had yielded to death,\
      and in its upward sightlessness seemed trying to regain that\
      spirit, to regain the guardianship it had just laid down.\
\
      Swithin took but one look at the face, and left the room; the\
      sight, he said afterwards, made him very queer. He went\
      downstairs shaking the whole house, and, seizing his hat,\
      clambered into his brougham, without giving any directions to the\
      coachman. He was driven home, and all the evening sat in his\
      chair without moving.\
\
      He could take nothing for dinner but a partridge, with an\
      imperial pint of champagne....\
\
      Old Jolyon stood at the bottom of the bed, his hands folded in\
      front of him. He alone of those in the room remembered the death\
      of his mother, and though he looked at Ann, it was of that he was\
      thinking. Ann was an old woman, but death had come to her at\
      last\'97death came to all! His face did not move, his gaze seemed\
      travelling from very far.\
\
      Aunt Hester stood beside him. She did not cry now, tears were\
      exhausted\'97her nature refused to permit a further escape of force;\
      she twisted her hands, looking not at Ann, but from side to side,\
      seeking some way of escaping the effort of realization.\
\
      Of all the brothers and sisters James manifested the most\
      emotion. Tears rolled down the parallel furrows of his thin face;\
      where he should go now to tell his troubles he did not know;\
      Juley was no good, Hester worse than useless! He felt Ann\'92s death\
      more than he had ever thought he should; this would upset him for\
      weeks!\
\
      Presently Aunt Hester stole out, and Aunt Juley began moving\
      about, doing \'93what was necessary,\'94 so that twice she knocked\
      against something. Old Jolyon, roused from his reverie, that\
      reverie of the long, long past, looked sternly at her, and went\
      away. James alone was left by the bedside; glancing stealthily\
      round, to see that he was not observed, he twisted his long body\
      down, placed a kiss on the dead forehead, then he, too, hastily\
      left the room. Encountering Smither in the hall, he began to ask\
      her about the funeral, and, finding that she knew nothing,\
      complained bitterly that, if they didn\'92t take care, everything\
      would go wrong. She had better send for Mr. Soames\'97he knew all\
      about that sort of thing; her master was very much upset, he\
      supposed\'97he would want looking after; as for her mistresses, they\
      were no good\'97they had no gumption! They would be ill too, he\
      shouldn\'92t wonder. She had better send for the doctor; it was best\
      to take things in time. He didn\'92t think his sister Ann had had\
      the best opinion; if she\'92d had Blank she would have been alive\
      now. Smither might send to Park Lane any time she wanted advice.\
      Of course, his carriage was at their service for the funeral. He\
      supposed she hadn\'92t such a thing as a glass of claret and a\
      biscuit\'97he had had no lunch!\
\
      The days before the funeral passed quietly. It had long been\
      known, of course, that Aunt Ann had left her little property to\
      Timothy. There was, therefore, no reason for the slightest\
      agitation. Soames, who was sole executor, took charge of all\
      arrangements, and in due course sent out the following invitation\
      to every male member of the family:\
\
      _\'93To\'97\'97\
          \'93Your presence is requested at the funeral of Miss Ann\
          Forsyte, in Highgate Cemetery, at noon of Oct. 1st. Carriages\
          will meet at \'91The Bower,\'92 Bayswater Road, at 10.45. No\
          flowers by request.\
          \'93R.S.V.P.\'94_\
\
      The morning came, cold, with a high, grey, London sky, and at\
      half-past ten the first carriage, that of James, drove up. It\
      contained James and his son-in-law Dartie, a fine man, with a\
      square chest, buttoned very tightly into a frock coat, and a\
      sallow, fattish face adorned with dark, well-curled moustaches,\
      and that incorrigible commencement of whisker which, eluding the\
      strictest attempts at shaving, seems the mark of something deeply\
      ingrained in the personality of the shaver, being especially\
      noticeable in men who speculate.\
\
      Soames, in his capacity of executor, received the guests, for\
      Timothy still kept his bed; he would get up after the funeral;\
      and Aunts Juley and Hester would not be coming down till all was\
      over, when it was understood there would be lunch for anyone who\
      cared to come back. The next to arrive was Roger, still limping\
      from the gout, and encircled by three of his sons\'97young Roger,\
      Eustace, and Thomas. George, the remaining son, arrived almost\
      immediately afterwards in a hansom, and paused in the hall to ask\
      Soames how he found undertaking pay.\
\
      They disliked each other.\
\
      Then came two Haymans\'97Giles and Jesse perfectly silent, and very\
      well dressed, with special creases down their evening trousers.\
      Then old Jolyon alone. Next, Nicholas, with a healthy colour in\
      his face, and a carefully veiled sprightliness in every movement\
      of his head and body. One of his sons followed him, meek and\
      subdued. Swithin Forsyte, and Bosinney arrived at the same\
      moment,\'97and stood\'97bowing precedence to each other,\'97but on the\
      door opening they tried to enter together; they renewed their\
      apologies in the hall, and, Swithin, settling his stock, which\
      had become disarranged in the struggle, very slowly mounted the\
      stairs. The other Hayman; two married sons of Nicholas, together\
      with Tweetyman, Spender, and Warry, the husbands of married\
      Forsyte and Hayman daughters. The company was then complete,\
      twenty-one in all, not a male member of the family being absent\
      but Timothy and young Jolyon.\
\
      Entering the scarlet and green drawing-room, whose apparel made\
      so vivid a setting for their unaccustomed costumes, each tried\
      nervously to find a seat, desirous of hiding the emphatic\
      blackness of his trousers. There seemed a sort of indecency in\
      that blackness and in the colour of their gloves\'97a sort of\
      exaggeration of the feelings; and many cast shocked looks of\
      secret envy at \'93the Buccaneer,\'94 who had no gloves, and was\
      wearing grey trousers. A subdued hum of conversation rose, no one\
      speaking of the departed, but each asking after the other, as\
      though thereby casting an indirect libation to this event, which\
      they had come to honour.\
\
      And presently James said:\
\
      \'93Well, I think we ought to be starting.\'94\
\
      They went downstairs, and, two and two, as they had been told off\
      in strict precedence, mounted the carriages.\
\
      The hearse started at a foot\'92s pace; the carriages moved slowly\
      after. In the first went old Jolyon with Nicholas; in the second,\
      the twins, Swithin and James; in the third, Roger and young\
      Roger; Soames, young Nicholas, George, and Bosinney followed in\
      the fourth. Each of the other carriages, eight in all, held three\
      or four of the family; behind them came the doctor\'92s brougham;\
      then, at a decent interval, cabs containing family clerks and\
      servants; and at the very end, one containing nobody at all, but\
      bringing the total cortege up to the number of thirteen.\
\
      So long as the procession kept to the highway of the Bayswater\
      Road, it retained the foot\'92s-pace, but, turning into less\
      important thorough-fares, it soon broke into a trot, and so\
      proceeded, with intervals of walking in the more fashionable\
      streets, until it arrived. In the first carriage old Jolyon and\
      Nicholas were talking of their wills. In the second the twins,\
      after a single attempt, had lapsed into complete silence; both\
      were rather deaf, and the exertion of making themselves heard was\
      too great. Only once James broke this silence:\
\
      \'93I shall have to be looking about for some ground somewhere. What\
      arrangements have you made, Swithin?\'94\
\
      And Swithin, fixing him with a dreadful stare, answered:\
\
      \'93Don\'92t talk to me about such things!\'94\
\
      In the third carriage a disjointed conversation was carried on in\
      the intervals of looking out to see how far they had got, George\
      remarking, \'93Well, it was really time that the poor old lady\
      went.\'94 He didn\'92t believe in people living beyond seventy, Young\
      Nicholas replied mildly that the rule didn\'92t seem to apply to the\
      Forsytes. George said he himself intended to commit suicide at\
      sixty. Young Nicholas, smiling and stroking a long chin, didn\'92t\
      think _his_ father would like that theory; he had made a lot of\
      money since he was sixty. Well, seventy was the outside limit; it\
      was then time, George said, for them to go and leave their money\
      to their children. Soames, hitherto silent, here joined in; he\
      had not forgotten the remark about the \'93undertaking,\'94 and,\
      lifting his eyelids almost imperceptibly, said it was all very\
      well for people who never made money to talk. He himself intended\
      to live as long as he could. This was a hit at George, who was\
      notoriously hard up. Bosinney muttered abstractedly \'93Hear, hear!\'94\
      and, George yawning, the conversation dropped.\
\
      Upon arriving, the coffin was borne into the chapel, and, two by\
      two, the mourners filed in behind it. This guard of men, all\
      attached to the dead by the bond of kinship, was an impressive\
      and singular sight in the great city of London, with its\
      overwhelming diversity of life, its innumerable vocations,\
      pleasures, duties, its terrible hardness, its terrible call to\
      individualism.\
\
      The family had gathered to triumph over all this, to give a show\
      of tenacious unity, to illustrate gloriously that law of property\
      underlying the growth of their tree, by which it had thriven and\
      spread, trunk and branches, the sap flowing through all, the full\
      growth reached at the appointed time. The spirit of the old woman\
      lying in her last sleep had called them to this demonstration. It\
      was her final appeal to that unity which had been their\
      strength\'97it was her final triumph that she had died while the\
      tree was yet whole.\
\
      She was spared the watching of the branches jut out beyond the\
      point of balance. She could not look into the hearts of her\
      followers. The same law that had worked in her, bringing her up\
      from a tall, straight-backed slip of a girl to a woman strong and\
      grown, from a woman grown to a woman old, angular, feeble, almost\
      witchlike, with individuality all sharpened and sharpened, as all\
      rounding from the world\'92s contact fell off from her\'97that same law\
      would work, was working, in the family she had watched like a\
      mother.\
\
      She had seen it young, and growing, she had seen it strong and\
      grown, and before her old eyes had time or strength to see any\
      more, she died. She would have tried, and who knows but she might\
      have kept it young and strong, with her old fingers, her\
      trembling kisses\'97a little longer; alas! not even Aunt Ann could\
      fight with Nature.\
\
      \'93Pride comes before a fall!\'94 In accordance with this, the\
      greatest of Nature\'92s ironies, the Forsyte family had gathered for\
      a last proud pageant before they fell. Their faces to right and\
      left, in single lines, were turned for the most part impassively\
      toward the ground, guardians of their thoughts; but here and\
      there, one looking upward, with a line between his brows,\
      searched to see some sight on the chapel walls too much for him,\
      to be listening to something that appalled. And the responses,\
      low-muttered, in voices through which rose the same tone, the\
      same unseizable family ring, sounded weird, as though murmured in\
      hurried duplication by a single person.\
\
      The service in the chapel over, the mourners filed up again to\
      guard the body to the tomb. The vault stood open, and, round it,\
      men in black were waiting.\
\
      From that high and sacred field, where thousands of the upper\
      middle class lay in their last sleep, the eyes of the Forsytes\
      travelled down across the flocks of graves. There\'97spreading to\
      the distance, lay London, with no sun over it, mourning the loss\
      of its daughter, mourning with this family, so dear, the loss of\
      her who was mother and guardian. A hundred thousand spires and\
      houses, blurred in the great grey web of property, lay there like\
      prostrate worshippers before the grave of this, the oldest\
      Forsyte of them all.\
\
      A few words, a sprinkle of earth, the thrusting of the coffin\
      home, and Aunt Ann had passed to her last rest.\
\
      Round the vault, trustees of that passing, the five brothers\
      stood, with white heads bowed; they would see that Ann was\
      comfortable where she was going. Her little property must stay\
      behind, but otherwise, all that could be should be done....\
\
      Then severally, each stood aside, and putting on his hat, turned\
      back to inspect the new inscription on the marble of the family\
      vault:\
\
     SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF\
     ANN FORSYTE,\
     THE DAUGHTER OF THE ABOVE\
     JOLYON AND ANN FORSYTE,\
     WHO DEPARTED THIS LIFE THE 27TH DAY OF\
     SEPTEMBER, 1886,\
     AGED EIGHTY-SEVEN YEARS AND FOUR DAYS.\
\
      Soon perhaps, someone else would be wanting an inscription. It\
      was strange and intolerable, for they had not thought somehow,\
      that Forsytes could die. And one and all they had a longing to\
      get away from this painfulness, this ceremony which had reminded\
      them of things they could not bear to think about\'97to get away\
      quickly and go about their business and forget.\
\
      It was cold, too; the wind, like some slow, disintegrating force,\
      blowing up the hill over the graves, struck them with its chilly\
      breath; they began to split into groups, and as quickly as\
      possible to fill the waiting carriages.\
\
      Swithin said he should go back to lunch at Timothy\'92s, and he\
      offered to take anybody with him in his brougham. It was\
      considered a doubtful privilege to drive with Swithin in his\
      brougham, which was not a large one; nobody accepted, and he went\
      off alone. James and Roger followed immediately after; they also\
      would drop in to lunch. The others gradually melted away, Old\
      Jolyon taking three nephews to fill up his carriage; he had a\
      want of those young faces.\
\
      Soames, who had to arrange some details in the cemetery office,\
      walked away with Bosinney. He had much to talk over with him,\
      and, having finished his business, they strolled to Hampstead,\
      lunched together at the Spaniard\'92s Inn, and spent a long time in\
      going into practical details connected with the building of the\
      house; they then proceeded to the tram-line, and came as far as\
      the Marble Arch, where Bosinney went off to Stanhope Gate to see\
      June.\
\
      Soames felt in excellent spirits when he arrived home, and\
      confided to Irene at dinner that he had had a good talk with\
      Bosinney, who really seemed a sensible fellow; they had had a\
      capital walk too, which had done his liver good\'97he had been short\
      of exercise for a long time\'97and altogether a very satisfactory\
      day. If only it hadn\'92t been for poor Aunt Ann, he would have\
      taken her to the theatre; as it was, they must make the best of\
      an evening at home.\
\
      \'93The Buccaneer asked after you more than once,\'94 he said suddenly.\
      And moved by some inexplicable desire to assert his\
      proprietorship, he rose from his chair and planted a kiss on his\
      wife\'92s shoulder.\
\
\
      PART II\
\
\
      CHAPTER I PROGRESS OF THE HOUSE\
\
      The winter had been an open one. Things in the trade were slack;\
      and as Soames had reflected before making up his mind, it had\
      been a good time for building. The shell of the house at Robin\
      Hill was thus completed by the end of April.\
\
      Now that there was something to be seen for his money, he had\
      been coming down once, twice, even three times a week, and would\
      mouse about among the debris for hours, careful never to soil his\
      clothes, moving silently through the unfinished brickwork of\
      doorways, or circling round the columns in the central court.\
\
      And he would stand before them for minutes together, as though\
      peering into the real quality of their substance.\
\
      On April 30 he had an appointment with Bosinney to go over the\
      accounts, and five minutes before the proper time he entered the\
      tent which the architect had pitched for himself close to the old\
      oak tree.\
\
      The accounts were already prepared on a folding table, and with a\
      nod Soames sat down to study them. It was some time before he\
      raised his head.\
\
      \'93I can\'92t make them out,\'94 he said at last; \'93they come to nearly\
      seven hundred more than they ought.\'94\
\
      After a glance at Bosinney\'92s face he went on quickly:\
\
      \'93If you only make a firm stand against these builder chaps you\'92ll\
      get them down. They stick you with everything if you don\'92t look\
      sharp.... Take ten per cent. off all round. I shan\'92t mind it\'92s\
      coming out a hundred or so over the mark!\'94\
\
      Bosinney shook his head:\
\
      \'93I\'92ve taken off every farthing I can!\'94\
\
      Soames pushed back the table with a movement of anger, which sent\
      the account sheets fluttering to the ground.\
\
      \'93Then all I can say is,\'94 he flustered out, \'93you\'92ve made a pretty\
      mess of it!\'94\
\
      \'93I\'92ve told you a dozen times,\'94 Bosinney answered sharply, \'93that\
      there\'92d be extras. I\'92ve pointed them out to you over and over\
      again!\'94\
\
      \'93I know that,\'94 growled Soames: \'93I shouldn\'92t have objected to a\
      ten pound note here and there. How was I to know that by \'91extras\'92\
      you meant seven hundred pounds?\'94\
\
      The qualities of both men had contributed to this\
      not-inconsiderable discrepancy. On the one hand, the architect\'92s\
      devotion to his idea, to the image of a house which he had\
      created and believed in\'97had made him nervous of being stopped, or\
      forced to the use of makeshifts; on the other, Soames\'92s not less\
      true and wholehearted devotion to the very best article that\
      could be obtained for the money, had rendered him averse to\
      believing that things worth thirteen shillings could not be\
      bought with twelve.\
\
      \'93I wish I\'92d never undertaken your house,\'94 said Bosinney suddenly.\
      \'93You come down here worrying me out of my life. You want double\
      the value for your money anybody else would, and now that you\'92ve\
      got a house that for its size is not to be beaten in the county,\
      you don\'92t want to pay for it. If you\'92re anxious to be off your\
      bargain, I daresay I can find the balance above the estimates\
      myself, but I\'92m d\'97\'97d if I do another stroke of work for you!\'94\
\
      Soames regained his composure. Knowing that Bosinney had no\
      capital, he regarded this as a wild suggestion. He saw, too, that\
      he would be kept indefinitely out of this house on which he had\
      set his heart, and just at the crucial point when the architect\'92s\
      personal care made all the difference. In the meantime there was\
      Irene to be thought of! She had been very queer lately. He really\
      believed it was only because she had taken to Bosinney that she\
      tolerated the idea of the house at all. It would not do to make\
      an open breach with her.\
\
      \'93You needn\'92t get into a rage,\'94 he said. \'93If I\'92m willing to put up\
      with it, I suppose you needn\'92t cry out. All I meant was that when\
      you tell me a thing is going to cost so much, I like to\'97well, in\
      fact, I\'97like to know where I am.\'94\
\
      \'93Look here!\'94 said Bosinney, and Soames was both annoyed and\
      surprised by the shrewdness of his glance. \'93You\'92ve got my\
      services dirt cheap. For the kind of work I\'92ve put into this\
      house, and the amount of time I\'92ve given to it, you\'92d have had to\
      pay Littlemaster or some other fool four times as much. What you\
      want, in fact, is a first-rate man for a fourth-rate fee, and\
      that\'92s exactly what you\'92ve got!\'94\
\
      Soames saw that he really meant what he said, and, angry though\
      he was, the consequences of a row rose before him too vividly. He\
      saw his house unfinished, his wife rebellious, himself a\
      laughingstock.\
\
      \'93Let\'92s go over it,\'94 he said sulkily, \'93and see how the money\'92s\
      gone.\'94\
\
      \'93Very well,\'94 assented Bosinney. \'93But we\'92ll hurry up, if you don\'92t\
      mind. I have to get back in time to take June to the theatre.\'94\
\
      Soames cast a stealthy look at him, and said: \'93Coming to our\
      place, I suppose to meet her?\'94 He was always coming to their\
      place!\
\
      There had been rain the night before\'97a spring rain, and the earth\
      smelt of sap and wild grasses. The warm, soft breeze swung the\
      leaves and the golden buds of the old oak tree, and in the\
      sunshine the blackbirds were whistling their hearts out.\
\
      It was such a spring day as breathes into a man an ineffable\
      yearning, a painful sweetness, a longing that makes him stand\
      motionless, looking at the leaves or grass, and fling out his\
      arms to embrace he knows not what. The earth gave forth a\
      fainting warmth, stealing up through the chilly garment in which\
      winter had wrapped her. It was her long caress of invitation, to\
      draw men down to lie within her arms, to roll their bodies on\
      her, and put their lips to her breast.\
\
      On just such a day as this Soames had got from Irene the promise\
      he had asked her for so often. Seated on the fallen trunk of a\
      tree, he had promised for the twentieth time that if their\
      marriage were not a success, she should be as free as if she had\
      never married him!\
\
      \'93Do you swear it?\'94 she had said. A few days back she had reminded\
      him of that oath. He had answered: \'93Nonsense! I couldn\'92t have\
      sworn any such thing!\'94 By some awkward fatality he remembered it\
      now. What queer things men would swear for the sake of women! He\
      would have sworn it at any time to gain her! He would swear it\
      now, if thereby he could touch her\'97but nobody could touch her,\
      she was cold-hearted!\
\
      And memories crowded on him with the fresh, sweet savour of the\
      spring wind\'97memories of his courtship.\
\
      In the spring of the year 1881 he was visiting his old\
      school-fellow and client, George Liversedge, of Branksome, who,\
      with the view of developing his pine-woods in the neighbourhood\
      of Bournemouth, had placed the formation of the company necessary\
      to the scheme in Soames\'92s hands. Mrs. Liversedge, with a sense of\
      the fitness of things, had given a musical tea in his honour.\
      Later in the course of this function, which Soames, no musician,\
      had regarded as an unmitigated bore, his eye had been caught by\
      the face of a girl dressed in mourning, standing by herself. The\
      lines of her tall, as yet rather thin figure, showed through the\
      wispy, clinging stuff of her black dress, her black-gloved hands\
      were crossed in front of her, her lips slightly parted, and her\
      large, dark eyes wandered from face to face. Her hair, done low\
      on her neck, seemed to gleam above her black collar like coils of\
      shining metal. And as Soames stood looking at her, the sensation\
      that most men have felt at one time or another went stealing\
      through him\'97a peculiar satisfaction of the senses, a peculiar\
      certainty, which novelists and old ladies call love at first\
      sight. Still stealthily watching her, he at once made his way to\
      his hostess, and stood doggedly waiting for the music to cease.\
\
      \'93Who is that girl with yellow hair and dark eyes?\'94 he asked.\
\
      \'93That\'97oh! Irene Heron. Her father, Professor Heron, died this\
      year. She lives with her stepmother. She\'92s a nice girl, a pretty\
      girl, but no money!\'94\
\
      \'93Introduce me, please,\'94 said Soames.\
\
      It was very little that he found to say, nor did he find her\
      responsive to that little. But he went away with the resolution\
      to see her again. He effected his object by chance, meeting her\
      on the pier with her stepmother, who had the habit of walking\
      there from twelve to one of a forenoon. Soames made this lady\'92s\
      acquaintance with alacrity, nor was it long before he perceived\
      in her the ally he was looking for. His keen scent for the\
      commercial side of family life soon told him that Irene cost her\
      stepmother more than the fifty pounds a year she brought her; it\
      also told him that Mrs. Heron, a woman yet in the prime of life,\
      desired to be married again. The strange ripening beauty of her\
      stepdaughter stood in the way of this desirable consummation. And\
      Soames, in his stealthy tenacity, laid his plans.\
\
      He left Bournemouth without having given himself away, but in a\
      month\'92s time came back, and this time he spoke, not to the girl,\
      but to her stepmother. He had made up his mind, he said; he would\
      wait any time. And he had long to wait, watching Irene bloom, the\
      lines of her young figure softening, the stronger blood deepening\
      the gleam of her eyes, and warming her face to a creamy glow; and\
      at each visit he proposed to her, and when that visit was at an\
      end, took her refusal away with him, back to London, sore at\
      heart, but steadfast and silent as the grave. He tried to come at\
      the secret springs of her resistance; only once had he a gleam of\
      light. It was at one of those assembly dances, which afford the\
      only outlet to the passions of the population of seaside\
      watering-places. He was sitting with her in an embrasure, his\
      senses tingling with the contact of the waltz. She had looked at\
      him over her slowly waving fan; and he had lost his head. Seizing\
      that moving wrist, he pressed his lips to the flesh of her arm.\
      And she had shuddered\'97to this day he had not forgotten that\
      shudder\'97nor the look so passionately averse she had given him.\
\
      A year after that she had yielded. What had made her yield he\
      could never make out; and from Mrs. Heron, a woman of some\
      diplomatic talent, he learnt nothing. Once after they were\
      married he asked her, \'93What made you refuse me so often?\'94 She had\
      answered by a strange silence. An enigma to him from the day that\
      he first saw her, she was an enigma to him still....\
\
      Bosinney was waiting for him at the door; and on his rugged,\
      good-looking, face was a queer, yearning, yet happy look, as\
      though he too saw a promise of bliss in the spring sky, sniffed a\
      coming happiness in the spring air. Soames looked at him waiting\
      there. What was the matter with the fellow that he looked so\
      happy? What was he waiting for with that smile on his lips and in\
      his eyes? Soames could not see that for which Bosinney was\
      waiting as he stood there drinking in the flower-scented wind.\
      And once more he felt baffled in the presence of this man whom by\
      habit he despised. He hastened on to the house.\
\
      \'93The only colour for those tiles,\'94 he heard Bosinney say, \'93is\
      ruby with a grey tint in the stuff, to give a transparent effect.\
      I should like Irene\'92s opinion. I\'92m ordering the purple leather\
      curtains for the doorway of this court; and if you distemper the\
      drawing-room ivory cream over paper, you\'92ll get an illusive look.\
      You want to aim all through the decorations at what I call\
      charm.\'94\
\
      Soames said: \'93You mean that my wife has charm!\'94\
\
      Bosinney evaded the question.\
\
      \'93You should have a clump of iris plants in the centre of that\
      court.\'94\
\
      Soames smiled superciliously.\
\
      \'93I\'92ll look into Beech\'92s some time,\'94 he said, \'93and see what\'92s\
      appropriate!\'94\
\
      They found little else to say to each other, but on the way to\
      the Station Soames asked:\
\
      \'93I suppose you find Irene very artistic.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94 The abrupt answer was as distinct a snub as saying: \'93If\
      you want to discuss her you can do it with someone else!\'94\
\
      And the slow, sulky anger Soames had felt all the afternoon\
      burned the brighter within him.\
\
      Neither spoke again till they were close to the Station, then\
      Soames asked:\
\
      \'93When do you expect to have finished?\'94\
\
      \'93By the end of June, if you really wish me to decorate as well.\'94\
\
      Soames nodded. \'93But you quite understand,\'94 he said, \'93that the\
      house is costing me a lot beyond what I contemplated. I may as\
      well tell you that I should have thrown it up, only I\'92m not in\
      the habit of giving up what I\'92ve set my mind on.\'94\
\
      Bosinney made no reply. And Soames gave him askance a look of\
      dogged dislike\'97for in spite of his fastidious air and that\
      supercilious, dandified taciturnity, Soames, with his set lips\
      and squared chin, was not unlike a bulldog....\
\
      When, at seven o\'92clock that evening, June arrived at 62,\
      Montpellier Square, the maid Bilson told her that Mr. Bosinney\
      was in the drawing-room; the mistress\'97she said\'97was dressing, and\
      would be down in a minute. She would tell her that Miss June was\
      here.\
\
      June stopped her at once.\
\
      \'93All right, Bilson,\'94 she said, \'93I\'92ll just go in. You, needn\'92t\
      hurry Mrs. Soames.\'94\
\
      She took off her cloak, and Bilson, with an understanding look,\
      did not even open the drawing-room door for her, but ran\
      downstairs.\
\
      June paused for a moment to look at herself in the little\
      old-fashioned silver mirror above the oaken rug chest\'97a slim,\
      imperious young figure, with a small resolute face, in a white\
      frock, cut moon-shaped at the base of a neck too slender for her\
      crown of twisted red-gold hair.\
\
      She opened the drawing-room door softly, meaning to take him by\
      surprise. The room was filled with a sweet hot scent of flowering\
      azaleas.\
\
      She took a long breath of the perfume, and heard Bosinney\'92s\
      voice, not in the room, but quite close, saying.\
\
      \'93Ah! there were such heaps of things I wanted to talk about, and\
      now we shan\'92t have time!\'94\
\
      Irene\'92s voice answered: \'93Why not at dinner?\'94\
\
      \'93How can one talk....\'94\
\
      Jun\'92s first thought was to go away, but instead she crossed to\
      the long window opening on the little court. It was from there\
      that the scent of the azaleas came, and, standing with their\
      backs to her, their faces buried in the golden-pink blossoms,\
      stood her lover and Irene.\
\
      Silent but unashamed, with flaming cheeks and angry eyes, the\
      girl watched.\
\
      \'93Come on Sunday by yourself\'97We can go over the house together.\'94\
\
      June saw Irene look up at him through her screen of blossoms. It\
      was not the look of a coquette, but\'97far worse to the watching\
      girl\'97of a woman fearful lest that look should say too much.\
\
      \'93I\'92ve promised to go for a drive with Uncle....\'94\
\
      \'93The big one! Make him bring you; it\'92s only ten miles\'97the very\
      thing for his horses.\'94\
\
      \'93Poor old Uncle Swithin!\'94\
\
      A wave of the azalea scent drifted into Jun\'92s face; she felt sick\
      and dizzy.\
\
      \'93Do! ah! do!\'94\
\
      \'93But why?\'94\
\
      \'93I must see you there\'97I thought you\'92d like to help me....\'94\
\
      The answer seemed to the girl to come softly with a tremble from\
      amongst the blossoms: \'93So I do!\'94\
\
      And she stepped into the open space of the window.\
\
      \'93How stuffy it is here!\'94 she said; \'93I can\'92t bear this scent!\'94\
\
      Her eyes, so angry and direct, swept both their faces.\
\
      \'93Were you talking about the house? _I_ haven\'92t seen it yet, you\
      know\'97shall we all go on Sunday?\'94\
\
      From Irene\'92s face the colour had flown.\
\
      \'93I am going for a drive that day with Uncle Swithin,\'94 she\
      answered.\
\
      \'93Uncle Swithin! What does he matter? You can throw him over!\'94\
\
      \'93I am not in the habit of throwing people over!\'94\
\
      There was a sound of footsteps and June saw Soames standing just\
      behind her.\
\
      \'93Well! if you are all ready,\'94 said Irene, looking from one to the\
      other with a strange smile, \'93dinner is too!\'94\
\
\
      CHAPTER II JUNE\'92S TREAT\
\
      Dinner began in silence; the women facing one another, and the\
      men.\
\
      In silence the soup was finished\'97excellent, if a little thick;\
      and fish was brought. In silence it was handed.\
\
      Bosinney ventured: \'93It\'92s the first spring day.\'94\
\
      Irene echoed softly: \'93Yes\'97the first spring day.\'94\
\
      \'93Spring!\'94 said June: \'93there isn\'92t a breath of air!\'94 No one\
      replied.\
\
      The fish was taken away, a fine fresh sole from Dover. And Bilson\
      brought champagne, a bottle swathed around the neck with\
      white....\
\
      Soames said: \'93You\'92ll find it dry.\'94\
\
      Cutlets were handed, each pink-frilled about the legs. They were\
      refused by June, and silence fell.\
\
      Soames said: \'93You\'92d better take a cutlet, June; there\'92s nothing\
      coming.\'94\
\
      But June again refused, so they were borne away. And then Irene\
      asked: \'93Phil, have you heard my blackbird?\'94\
\
      Bosinney answered: \'93Rather\'97he\'92s got a hunting-song. As I came\
      round I heard him in the Square.\'94\
\
      \'93He\'92s such a darling!\'94\
\
      \'93Salad, sir?\'94 Spring chicken was removed.\
\
      But Soames was speaking: \'93The asparagus is very poor. Bosinney,\
      glass of sherry with your sweet? June, you\'92re drinking nothing!\'94\
\
      June said: \'93You know I never do. Wine\'92s such horrid stuff!\'94\
\
      An apple charlotte came upon a silver dish, and smilingly Irene\
      said: \'93The azaleas are so wonderful this year!\'94\
\
      To this Bosinney murmured: \'93Wonderful! The scent\'92s\
      extraordinary!\'94\
\
      June said: \'93How can you like the scent? Sugar, please, Bilson.\'94\
\
      Sugar was handed her, and Soames remarked: \'93This charlotte\'92s\
      good!\'94\
\
      The charlotte was removed. Long silence followed. Irene,\
      beckoning, said: \'93Take out the azalea, Bilson. Miss June can\'92t\
      bear the scent.\'94\
\
      \'93No; let it stay,\'94 said June.\
\
      Olives from France, with Russian caviare, were placed on little\
      plates. And Soames remarked: \'93Why can\'92t we have the Spanish?\'94 But\
      no one answered.\
\
      The olives were removed. Lifting her tumbler June demanded: \'93Give\
      me some water, please.\'94 Water was given her. A silver tray was\
      brought, with German plums. There was a lengthy pause. In perfect\
      harmony all were eating them.\
\
      Bosinney counted up the stones: \'93This year\'97next year\'97some time.\'94\
\
      Irene finished softly: \'93Never! There was such a glorious sunset.\
      The sky\'92s all ruby still\'97so beautiful!\'94\
\
      He answered: \'93Underneath the dark.\'94\
\
      Their eyes had met, and June cried scornfully: \'93A London sunset!\'94\
\
      Egyptian cigarettes were handed in a silver box. Soames, taking\
      one, remarked: \'93What time\'92s your play begin?\'94\
\
      No one replied, and Turkish coffee followed in enamelled cups.\
\
      Irene, smiling quietly, said: \'93If only....\'94\
\
      \'93Only what?\'94 said June.\
\
      \'93If only it could always be the spring!\'94\
\
      Brandy was handed; it was pale and old.\
\
      Soames said: \'93Bosinney, better take some brandy.\'94\
\
      Bosinney took a glass; they all arose.\
\
      \'93You want a cab?\'94 asked Soames.\
\
      June answered: \'93No! My cloaks please, Bilson.\'94 Her cloak was\
      brought.\
\
      Irene, from the window, murmured: \'93Such a lovely night! The stars\
      are coming out!\'94\
\
      Soames added: \'93Well, I hope you\'92ll both enjoy yourselves.\'94\
\
      From the door June answered: \'93Thanks. Come, Phil.\'94\
\
      Bosinney cried: \'93I\'92m coming.\'94\
\
      Soames smiled a sneering smile, and said: \'93I wish you luck!\'94\
\
      And at the door Irene watched them go.\
\
      Bosinney called: \'93Good night!\'94\
\
      \'93Good night!\'94 she answered softly....\
\
      June made her lover take her on the top of a \'92bus, saying she\
      wanted air, and there sat silent, with her face to the breeze.\
\
      The driver turned once or twice, with the intention of venturing\
      a remark, but thought better of it. They were a lively couple!\
      The spring had got into his blood, too; he felt the need for\
      letting steam escape, and clucked his tongue, flourishing his\
      whip, wheeling his horses, and even they, poor things, had\
      smelled the spring, and for a brief half-hour spurned the\
      pavement with happy hoofs.\
\
      The whole town was alive; the boughs, curled upward with their\
      decking of young leaves, awaited some gift the breeze could\
      bring. New-lighted lamps were gaining mastery, and the faces of\
      the crowd showed pale under that glare, while on high the great\
      white clouds slid swiftly, softly, over the purple sky.\
\
      Men in evening dress had thrown back overcoats, stepping jauntily\
      up the steps of Clubs; working folk loitered; and women\'97those\
      women who at that time of night are solitary\'97solitary and moving\
      eastward in a stream\'97swung slowly along, with expectation in\
      their gait, dreaming of good wine and a good supper, or, for an\
      unwonted minute, of kisses given for love.\
\
      Those countless figures, going their ways under the lamps and the\
      moving sky, had one and all received some restless blessing from\
      the stir of spring. And one and all, like those clubmen with\
      their opened coats, had shed something of caste, and creed, and\
      custom, and by the cock of their hats, the pace of their walk,\
      their laughter, or their silence, revealed their common kinship\
      under the passionate heavens.\
\
      Bosinney and June entered the theatre in silence, and mounted to\
      their seats in the upper boxes. The piece had just begun, and the\
      half-darkened house, with its rows of creatures peering all one\
      way, resembled a great garden of flowers turning their faces to\
      the sun.\
\
      June had never before been in the upper boxes. From the age of\
      fifteen she had habitually accompanied her grandfather to the\
      stalls, and not common stalls, but the best seats in the house,\
      towards the centre of the third row, booked by old Jolyon, at\
      Grogan and Boyne\'92s, on his way home from the City, long before\
      the day; carried in his overcoat pocket, together with his\
      cigar-case and his old kid gloves, and handed to June to keep\
      till the appointed night. And in those stalls\'97an erect old figure\
      with a serene white head, a little figure, strenuous and eager,\
      with a red-gold head\'97they would sit through every kind of play,\
      and on the way home old Jolyon would say of the principal actor:\
      \'93Oh, he\'92s a poor stick! You should have seen little Bobson!\'94\
\
      She had looked forward to this evening with keen delight; it was\
      stolen, chaperone-less, undreamed of at Stanhope Gate, where she\
      was supposed to be at Soames\'92s. She had expected reward for her\
      subterfuge, planned for her lover\'92s sake; she had expected it to\
      break up the thick, chilly cloud, and make the relations between\
      them which of late had been so puzzling, so tormenting\'97sunny and\
      simple again as they had been before the winter. She had come\
      with the intention of saying something definite; and she looked\
      at the stage with a furrow between her brows, seeing nothing, her\
      hands squeezed together in her lap. A swarm of jealous suspicions\
      stung and stung her.\
\
      If Bosinney was conscious of her trouble he made no sign.\
\
      The curtain dropped. The first act had come to an end.\
\
      \'93It\'92s awfully hot here!\'94 said the girl; \'93I should like to go\
      out.\'94\
\
      She was very white, and she knew\'97for with her nerves thus\
      sharpened she saw everything\'97that he was both uneasy and\
      compunctious.\
\
      At the back of the theatre an open balcony hung over the street;\
      she took possession of this, and stood leaning there without a\
      word, waiting for him to begin.\
\
      At last she could bear it no longer.\
\
      \'93I want to say something to you, Phil,\'94 she said.\
\
      \'93Yes?\'94\
\
      The defensive tone of his voice brought the colour flying to her\
      cheek, the words flying to her lips: \'93You don\'92t give me a chance\
      to be nice to you; you haven\'92t for ages now!\'94\
\
      Bosinney stared down at the street. He made no answer....\
\
      June cried passionately: \'93You know I want to do everything for\
      you\'97that I want to be everything to you....\'94\
\
      A hum rose from the street, and, piercing it with a sharp \'93ping,\'94\
      the bell sounded for the raising of the curtain. June did not\
      stir. A desperate struggle was going on within her. Should she\
      put everything to the proof? Should she challenge directly that\
      influence, that attraction which was driving him away from her?\
      It was her nature to challenge, and she said: \'93Phil, take me to\
      see the house on Sunday!\'94\
\
      With a smile quivering and breaking on her lips, and trying, how\
      hard, not to show that she was watching, she searched his face,\
      saw it waver and hesitate, saw a troubled line come between his\
      brows, the blood rush into his face. He answered: \'93Not Sunday,\
      dear; some other day!\'94\
\
      \'93Why not Sunday? I shouldn\'92t be in the way on Sunday.\'94\
\
      He made an evident effort, and said: \'93I have an engagement.\'94\
\
      \'93You are going to take....\'94\
\
      His eyes grew angry; he shrugged his shoulders, and answered: \'93An\
      engagement that will prevent my taking you to see the house!\'94\
\
      June bit her lip till the blood came, and walked back to her seat\
      without another word, but she could not help the tears of rage\
      rolling down her face. The house had been mercifully darkened for\
      a crisis, and no one could see her trouble.\
\
      Yet in this world of Forsytes let no man think himself immune\
      from observation.\
\
      In the third row behind, Euphemia, Nicholas\'92s youngest daughter,\
      with her married-sister, Mrs. Tweetyman, were watching.\
\
      They reported at Timothy\'92s, how they had seen June and her fianc\'e9\
      at the theatre.\
\
      \'93In the stalls?\'94 \'93No, not in the....\'94 \'93Oh! in the dress circle,\
      of course. That seemed to be quite fashionable nowadays with\
      young people!\'94\
\
      Well\'97not exactly. In the.... Anyway, _that_ engagement wouldn\'92t\
      last long. They had never seen anyone look so thunder and\
      lightningy as that little June! With tears of enjoyment in their\
      eyes, they related how she had kicked a man\'92s hat as she returned\
      to her seat in the middle of an act, and how the man had looked.\
      Euphemia had a noted, silent laugh, terminating most\
      disappointingly in squeaks; and when Mrs. Small, holding up her\
      hands, said: \'93My dear! Kicked a ha-at?\'94 she let out such a number\
      of these that she had to be recovered with smelling-salts. As she\
      went away she said to Mrs. Tweetyman:\
\
      \'93Kicked a\'97ha-at! Oh! I shall die.\'94\
\
      For \'93that little June\'94 this evening, that was to have been \'93her\
      treat,\'94 was the most miserable she had ever spent. God knows she\
      tried to stifle her pride, her suspicion, her jealousy!\
\
      She parted from Bosinney at old Jolyon\'92s door without breaking\
      down; the feeling that her lover must be conquered was strong\
      enough to sustain her till his retiring footsteps brought home\
      the true extent of her wretchedness.\
\
      The noiseless \'93Sankey\'94 let her in. She would have slipped up to\
      her own room, but old Jolyon, who had heard her entrance, was in\
      the dining-room doorway.\
\
      \'93Come in and have your milk,\'94 he said. \'93It\'92s been kept hot for\
      you. You\'92re very late. Where have you been?\'94\
\
      June stood at the fireplace, with a foot on the fender and an arm\
      on the mantelpiece, as her grandfather had done when he came in\
      that night of the opera. She was too near a breakdown to care\
      what she told him.\
\
      \'93We dined at Soames\'92s.\'94\
\
      \'93H\'92m! the man of property! His wife there and Bosinney?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon\'92s glance was fixed on her with the penetrating gaze\
      from which it was difficult to hide; but she was not looking at\
      him, and when she turned her face, he dropped his scrutiny at\
      once. He had seen enough, and too much. He bent down to lift the\
      cup of milk for her from the hearth, and, turning away, grumbled:\
      \'93You oughtn\'92t to stay out so late; it makes you fit for nothing.\'94\
\
      He was invisible now behind his paper, which he turned with a\
      vicious crackle; but when June came up to kiss him, he said:\
      \'93Good-night, my darling,\'94 in a tone so tremulous and unexpected,\
      that it was all the girl could do to get out of the room without\
      breaking into the fit of sobbing which lasted her well on into\
      the night.\
\
      When the door was closed, old Jolyon dropped his paper, and\
      stared long and anxiously in front of him.\
\
      \'93The beggar!\'94 he thought. \'93I always knew she\'92d have trouble with\
      him!\'94\
\
      Uneasy doubts and suspicions, the more poignant that he felt\
      himself powerless to check or control the march of events, came\
      crowding upon him.\
\
      Was the fellow going to jilt her? He longed to go and say to him:\
      \'93Look here, you sir! Are you going to jilt my grand-daughter?\'94\
      But how could he? Knowing little or nothing, he was yet certain,\
      with his unerring astuteness, that there was something going on.\
      He suspected Bosinney of being too much at Montpellier Square.\
\
      \'93This fellow,\'94 he thought, \'93may not be a scamp; his face is not a\
      bad one, but he\'92s a queer fish. I don\'92t know what to make of him.\
      I shall never know what to make of him! They tell me he works\
      like a nigger, but I see no good coming of it. He\'92s unpractical,\
      he has no method. When he comes here, he sits as glum as a\
      monkey. If I ask him what wine he\'92ll have, he says: \'91Thanks, any\
      wine.\'92 If I offer him a cigar, he smokes it as if it were a\
      twopenny German thing. I never see him looking at June as he\
      ought to look at her; and yet, he\'92s not after her money. If she\
      were to make a sign, he\'92d be off his bargain to-morrow. But she\
      won\'92t\'97not she! She\'92ll stick to him! She\'92s as obstinate as\
      fate\'97she\'92ll never let go!\'94\
\
      Sighing deeply, he turned the paper; in its columns, perchance he\
      might find consolation.\
\
      And upstairs in her room June sat at her open window, where the\
      spring wind came, after its revel across the Park, to cool her\
      hot cheeks and burn her heart.\
\
\
      CHAPTER III DRIVE WITH SWITHIN\
\
      Two lines of a certain song in a certain famous old school\'92s\
      songbook run as follows:\
\
      \'93How the buttons on his blue frock shone, tra-la-la!\
      How he carolled and he sang, like a bird!...\'94\
\
      Swithin did not exactly carol and sing like a bird, but he felt\
      almost like endeavouring to hum a tune, as he stepped out of Hyde\
      Park Mansions, and contemplated his horses drawn up before the\
      door.\
\
      The afternoon was as balmy as a day in June, and to complete the\
      simile of the old song, he had put on a blue frock-coat,\
      dispensing with an overcoat, after sending Adolf down three times\
      to make sure that there was not the least suspicion of east in\
      the wind; and the frock-coat was buttoned so tightly around his\
      personable form, that, if the buttons did not shine, they might\
      pardonably have done so. Majestic on the pavement he fitted on a\
      pair of dog-skin gloves; with his large bell-shaped top hat, and\
      his great stature and bulk he looked too primeval for a Forsyte.\
      His thick white hair, on which Adolf had bestowed a touch of\
      pomatum, exhaled the fragrance of opoponax and cigars\'97the\
      celebrated Swithin brand, for which he paid one hundred and forty\
      shillings the hundred, and of which old Jolyon had unkindly said,\
      he wouldn\'92t smoke them as a gift; they wanted the stomach of a\
      horse!\
\
      \'93Adolf!\'94\
\
      \'93Sare!\'94\
\
      \'93The new plaid rug!\'94\
\
      He would never teach that fellow to look smart; and Mrs. Soames\
      he felt sure, had an eye!\
\
      \'93The phaeton hood down; I am going\'97to\'97drive\'97a\'97lady!\'94\
\
      A pretty woman would want to show off her frock; and well\'97he was\
      going to drive a lady! It was like a new beginning to the good\
      old days.\
\
      Ages since he had driven a woman! The last time, if he\
      remembered, it had been Juley; the poor old soul had been as\
      nervous as a cat the whole time, and so put him out of patience\
      that, as he dropped her in the Bayswater Road, he had said: \'93Well\
      I\'92m d\'97\'97d if I ever drive you again!\'94 And he never had, not he!\
\
      Going up to his horses\'92 heads, he examined their bits; not that\
      he knew anything about bits\'97he didn\'92t pay his coachman sixty\
      pounds a year to do his work for him, that had never been his\
      principle. Indeed, his reputation as a horsey man rested mainly\
      on the fact that once, on Derby Day, he had been welshed by some\
      thimble-riggers. But someone at the Club, after seeing him drive\
      his greys up to the door\'97he always drove grey horses, you got\
      more style for the money, some thought\'97had called him\
      \'93Four-in-hand Forsyte.\'94 The name having reached his ears through\
      that fellow Nicholas Treffry, old Jolyon\'92s dead partner, the\
      great driving man notorious for more carriage accidents than any\
      man in the kingdom\'97Swithin had ever after conceived it right to\
      act up to it. The name had taken his fancy, not because he had\
      ever driven four-in-hand, or was ever likely to, but because of\
      something distinguished in the sound. Four-in-hand Forsyte! Not\
      bad! Born too soon, Swithin had missed his vocation. Coming upon\
      London twenty years later, he could not have failed to have\
      become a stockbroker, but at the time when he was obliged to\
      select, this great profession had not as yet become the chief\
      glory of the upper-middle class. He had literally been forced\
      into auctioneering.\
\
      Once in the driving seat, with the reins handed to him, and\
      blinking over his pale old cheeks in the full sunlight, he took a\
      slow look round\'97Adolf was already up behind; the cockaded groom\
      at the horses\'92 heads stood ready to let go; everything was\
      prepared for the signal, and Swithin gave it. The equipage dashed\
      forward, and before you could say Jack Robinson, with a rattle\
      and flourish drew up at Soames\'92s door.\
\
      Irene came out at once, and stepped in\'97he afterward described it\
      at Timothy\'92s\'97\'93as light as\'97er\'97Taglioni, no fuss about it, no\
      wanting this or wanting that;\'94 and above all, Swithin dwelt on\
      this, staring at Mrs. Septimus in a way that disconcerted her a\
      good deal, \'93no silly nervousness!\'94 To Aunt Hester he portrayed\
      Irene\'92s hat. \'93Not one of your great flopping things, sprawling\
      about, and catching the dust, that women are so fond of nowadays,\
      but a neat little\'97\'94 he made a circular motion of his hand, \'93white\
      veil\'97capital taste.\'94\
\
      \'93What was it made of?\'94 inquired Aunt Hester, who manifested a\
      languid but permanent excitement at any mention of dress.\
\
      \'93Made of?\'94 returned Swithin; \'93now how should I know?\'94\
\
      He sank into silence so profound that Aunt Hester began to be\
      afraid he had fallen into a trance. She did not try to rouse him\
      herself, it not being her custom.\
\
      \'93I wish somebody would come,\'94 she thought; \'93I don\'92t like the look\
      of him!\'94\
\
      But suddenly Swithin returned to life. \'93Made of\'94 he wheezed out\
      slowly, \'93what should it be made of?\'94\
\
      They had not gone four miles before Swithin received the\
      impression that Irene liked driving with him. Her face was so\
      soft behind that white veil, and her dark eyes shone so in the\
      spring light, and whenever he spoke she raised them to him and\
      smiled.\
\
      On Saturday morning Soames had found her at her writing-table\
      with a note written to Swithin, putting him off. Why did she want\
      to put him off? he asked. She might put her own people off when\
      she liked, he would not have her putting off _his_ people!\
\
      She had looked at him intently, had torn up the note, and said:\
      \'93Very well!\'94\
\
      And then she began writing another. He took a casual glance\
      presently, and saw that it was addressed to Bosinney.\
\
      \'93What are you writing to _him_ about?\'94 he asked.\
\
      Irene, looking at him again with that intent look, said quietly:\
      \'93Something he wanted me to do for him!\'94\
\
      \'93Humph!\'94 said Soames,\'97\'93Commissions!\'94\
\
      \'93You\'92ll have your work cut out if you begin that sort of thing!\'94\
      He said no more.\
\
      Swithin opened his eyes at the mention of Robin Hill; it was a\
      long way for his horses, and he always dined at half-past seven,\
      before the rush at the Club began; the new chef took more trouble\
      with an early dinner\'97a lazy rascal!\
\
      He would like to have a look at the house, however. A house\
      appealed to any Forsyte, and especially to one who had been an\
      auctioneer. After all he said the distance was nothing. When he\
      was a younger man he had had rooms at Richmond for many years,\
      kept his carriage and pair there, and drove them up and down to\
      business every day of his life.\
\
      Four-in-hand Forsyte they called him! His T-cart, his horses had\
      been known from Hyde Park Corner to the Star and Garter. The Duke\
      of Z.... wanted to get hold of them, would have given him double\
      the money, but he had kept them; know a good thing when you have\
      it, eh? A look of solemn pride came portentously on his shaven\
      square old face, he rolled his head in his stand-up collar, like\
      a turkey-cock preening himself.\
\
      She was really\'97a charming woman! He enlarged upon her frock\
      afterwards to Aunt Juley, who held up her hands at his way of\
      putting it.\
\
      Fitted her like a skin\'97tight as a drum; that was how he liked\
      \'92em, all of a piece, none of your daverdy, scarecrow women! He\
      gazed at Mrs. Septimus Small, who took after James\'97long and thin.\
\
      \'93There\'92s style about her,\'94 he went on, \'93fit for a king! And she\'92s\
      so quiet with it too!\'94\
\
      \'93She seems to have made quite a conquest of you, any way,\'94\
      drawled Aunt Hester from her corner.\
\
      Swithin heard extremely well when anybody attacked him.\
\
      \'93What\'92s that?\'94 he said. \'93I know a\'97pretty\'97woman when I see one,\
      and all I can say is, I don\'92t see the young man about that\'92s fit\
      for her; but perhaps\'97you\'97do, come, perhaps\'97you-do!\'94\
\
      \'93Oh?\'94 murmured Aunt Hester, \'93ask Juley!\'94\
\
      Long before they reached Robin Hill, however, the unaccustomed\
      airing had made him terribly sleepy; he drove with his eyes\
      closed, a life-time of deportment alone keeping his tall and\
      bulky form from falling askew.\
\
      Bosinney, who was watching, came out to meet them, and all three\
      entered the house together; Swithin in front making play with a\
      stout gold-mounted Malacca cane, put into his hand by Adolf, for\
      his knees were feeling the effects of their long stay in the same\
      position. He had assumed his fur coat, to guard against the\
      draughts of the unfinished house.\
\
      The staircase\'97he said\'97was handsome! the baronial style! They\
      would want some statuary about! He came to a standstill between\
      the columns of the doorway into the inner court, and held out his\
      cane inquiringly.\
\
      What was this to be\'97this vestibule, or whatever they called it?\
      But gazing at the skylight, inspiration came to him.\
\
      \'93Ah! the billiard-room!\'94\
\
      When told it was to be a tiled court with plants in the centre,\
      he turned to Irene:\
\
      \'93Waste this on plants? You take my advice and have a billiard\
      table here!\'94\
\
      Irene smiled. She had lifted her veil, banding it like a nun\'92s\
      coif across her forehead, and the smile of her dark eyes below\
      this seemed to Swithin more charming than ever. He nodded. She\
      would take his advice he saw.\
\
      He had little to say of the drawing or dining-rooms, which he\
      described as \'93spacious\'94; but fell into such raptures as he\
      permitted to a man of his dignity, in the wine-cellar, to which\
      he descended by stone steps, Bosinney going first with a light.\
\
      \'93You\'92ll have room here,\'94 he said, \'93for six or seven hundred\
      dozen\'97a very pooty little cellar!\'94\
\
      Bosinney having expressed the wish to show them the house from\
      the copse below, Swithin came to a stop.\
\
      \'93There\'92s a fine view from here,\'94 he remarked; \'93you haven\'92t such a\
      thing as a chair?\'94\
\
      A chair was brought him from Bosinney\'92s tent.\
\
      \'93You go down,\'94 he said blandly; \'93you two! I\'92ll sit here and look\
      at the view.\'94\
\
      He sat down by the oak tree, in the sun; square and upright, with\
      one hand stretched out, resting on the nob of his cane, the other\
      planted on his knee; his fur coat thrown open, his hat, roofing\
      with its flat top the pale square of his face; his stare, very\
      blank, fixed on the landscape.\
\
      He nodded to them as they went off down through the fields. He\
      was, indeed, not sorry to be left thus for a quiet moment of\
      reflection. The air was balmy, not too much heat in the sun; the\
      prospect a fine one, a remarka.... His head fell a little to one\
      side; he jerked it up and thought: Odd! He\'97ah! They were waving\
      to him from the bottom! He put up his hand, and moved it more\
      than once. They were active\'97the prospect was remar.... His head\
      fell to the left, he jerked it up at once; it fell to the right.\
      It remained there; he was asleep.\
\
      And asleep, a sentinel on the\'97top of the rise, he appeared to\
      rule over this prospect\'97remarkable\'97like some image blocked out by\
      the special artist, of primeval Forsytes in pagan days, to record\
      the domination of mind over matter!\
\
      And all the unnumbered generations of his yeoman ancestors, wont\
      of a Sunday to stand akimbo surveying their little plots of land,\
      their grey unmoving eyes hiding their instinct with its hidden\
      roots of violence, their instinct for possession to the exclusion\
      of all the world\'97all these unnumbered generations seemed to sit\
      there with him on the top of the rise.\
\
      But from him, thus slumbering, his jealous Forsyte spirit\
      travelled far, into God-knows-what jungle of fancies; with those\
      two young people, to see what they were doing down there in the\
      copse\'97in the copse where the spring was running riot with the\
      scent of sap and bursting buds, the song of birds innumerable, a\
      carpet of bluebells and sweet growing things, and the sun caught\
      like gold in the tops of the trees; to see what they were doing,\
      walking along there so close together on the path that was too\
      narrow; walking along there so close that they were always\
      touching; to watch Irene\'92s eyes, like dark thieves, stealing the\
      heart out of the spring. And a great unseen chaperon, his spirit\
      was there, stopping with them to look at the little furry corpse\
      of a mole, not dead an hour, with his mushroom-and-silver coat\
      untouched by the rain or dew; watching over Irene\'92s bent head,\
      and the soft look of her pitying eyes; and over that young man\'92s\
      head, gazing at her so hard, so strangely. Walking on with them,\
      too, across the open space where a wood-cutter had been at work,\
      where the bluebells were trampled down, and a trunk had swayed\
      and staggered down from its gashed stump. Climbing it with them,\
      over, and on to the very edge of the copse, whence there\
      stretched an undiscovered country, from far away in which came\
      the sounds, \'93Cuckoo-cuckoo!\'94\
\
      Silent, standing with them there, and uneasy at their silence!\
      Very queer, very strange!\
\
      Then back again, as though guilty, through the wood\'97back to the\
      cutting, still silent, amongst the songs of birds that never\
      ceased, and the wild scent\'97hum! what was it\'97like that herb they\
      put in\'97back to the log across the path....\
\
      And then unseen, uneasy, flapping above them, trying to make\
      noises, his Forsyte spirit watched her balanced on the log, her\
      pretty figure swaying, smiling down at that young man gazing up\
      with such strange, shining eyes, slipping now\'97a\'97ah! falling,\
      o\'97oh! sliding\'97down his breast; her soft, warm body clutched, her\
      head bent back from his lips; his kiss; her recoil; his cry: \'93You\
      must know\'97I love you!\'94 Must know\'97indeed, a pretty...? Love! Hah!\
\
      Swithin awoke; virtue had gone out of him. He had a taste in his\
      mouth. Where was he?\
\
      Damme! He had been asleep!\
\
      He had dreamed something about a new soup, with a taste of mint\
      in it.\
\
      Those young people\'97where had they got to? His left leg had pins\
      and needles.\
\
      \'93Adolf!\'94 The rascal was not there; the rascal was asleep\
      somewhere.\
\
      He stood up, tall, square, bulky in his fur, looking anxiously\
      down over the fields, and presently he saw them coming.\
\
      Irene was in front; that young fellow\'97what had they nicknamed\
      him\'97\'93The Buccaneer?\'94 looked precious hangdog there behind her;\
      had got a flea in his ear, he shouldn\'92t wonder. Serve him right,\
      taking her down all that way to look at the house! The proper\
      place to look at a house from was the lawn.\
\
      They saw him. He extended his arm, and moved it spasmodically to\
      encourage them. But they had stopped. What were they standing\
      there for, talking\'97talking? They came on again. She had been\
      giving him a rub, he had not the least doubt of it, and no\
      wonder, over a house like that\'97a great ugly thing, not the sort\
      of house he was accustomed to.\
\
      He looked intently at their faces, with his pale, immovable\
      stare. That young man looked very queer!\
\
      \'93You\'92ll never make anything of this!\'94 he said tartly, pointing at\
      the mansion;\'97\'93too newfangled!\'94\
\
      Bosinney gazed at him as though he had not heard; and Swithin\
      afterwards described him to Aunt Hester as \'93an extravagant sort\
      of fellow very odd way of looking at you\'97a bumpy beggar!\'94\
\
      What gave rise to this sudden piece of psychology he did not\
      state; possibly Bosinney\'92s prominent forehead and cheekbones and\
      chin, or something hungry in his face, which quarrelled with\
      Swithin\'92s conception of the calm satiety that should characterize\
      the perfect gentleman.\
\
      He brightened up at the mention of tea. He had a contempt for\
      tea\'97his brother Jolyon had been in tea; made a lot of money by\
      it\'97but he was so thirsty, and had such a taste in his mouth, that\
      he was prepared to drink anything. He longed to inform Irene of\
      the taste in his mouth\'97she was so sympathetic\'97but it would not be\
      a distinguished thing to do; he rolled his tongue round, and\
      faintly smacked it against his palate.\
\
      In a far corner of the tent Adolf was bending his cat-like\
      moustaches over a kettle. He left it at once to draw the cork of\
      a pint-bottle of champagne. Swithin smiled, and, nodding at\
      Bosinney, said: \'93Why, you\'92re quite a Monte Cristo!\'94 This\
      celebrated novel\'97one of the half-dozen he had read\'97had produced\
      an extraordinary impression on his mind.\
\
      Taking his glass from the table, he held it away from him to\
      scrutinize the colour; thirsty as he was, it was not likely that\
      he was going to drink trash! Then, placing it to his lips, he\
      took a sip.\
\
      \'93A very nice wine,\'94 he said at last, passing it before his nose;\
      \'93not the equal of my Heidsieck!\'94\
\
      It was at this moment that the idea came to him which he\
      afterwards imparted at Timothy\'92s in this nutshell: \'93I shouldn\'92t\
      wonder a bit if that architect chap were sweet upon Mrs. Soames!\'94\
\
      And from this moment his pale, round eyes never ceased to bulge\
      with the interest of his discovery.\
\
      \'93The fellow,\'94 he said to Mrs. Septimus, \'93follows her about with\
      his eyes like a dog\'97the bumpy beggar! I don\'92t wonder at it\'97she\'92s\
      a very charming woman, and, I should say, the pink of\
      discretion!\'94 A vague consciousness of perfume caging about Irene,\
      like that from a flower with half-closed petals and a passionate\
      heart, moved him to the creation of this image. \'93But I wasn\'92t\
      sure of it,\'94 he said, \'93till I saw him pick up her handkerchief.\'94\
\
      Mrs. Small\'92s eyes boiled with excitement.\
\
      \'93And did he give it her back?\'94 she asked.\
\
      \'93Give it back?\'94 said Swithin: \'93I saw him slobber on it when he\
      thought I wasn\'92t looking!\'94\
\
      Mrs. Small gasped\'97too interested to speak.\
\
      \'93But _she_ gave him no encouragement,\'94 went on Swithin; he\
      stopped, and stared for a minute or two in the way that alarmed\
      Aunt Hester so\'97he had suddenly recollected that, as they were\
      starting back in the phaeton, she had given Bosinney her hand a\
      second time, and let it stay there too.... He had touched his\
      horses smartly with the whip, anxious to get her all to himself.\
      But she had looked back, and she had not answered his first\
      question; neither had he been able to see her face\'97she had kept\
      it hanging down.\
\
      There is somewhere a picture, which Swithin has not seen, of a\
      man sitting on a rock, and by him, immersed in the still, green\
      water, a sea-nymph lying on her back, with her hand on her naked\
      breast. She has a half-smile on her face\'97a smile of hopeless\
      surrender and of secret joy.\
\
      Seated by Swithin\'92s side, Irene may have been smiling like that.\
\
      When, warmed by champagne, he had her all to himself, he\
      unbosomed himself of his wrongs; of his smothered resentment\
      against the new chef at the club; his worry over the house in\
      Wigmore Street, where the rascally tenant had gone bankrupt\
      through helping his brother-in-law as if charity did not begin at\
      home; of his deafness, too, and that pain he sometimes got in his\
      right side. She listened, her eyes swimming under their lids. He\
      thought she was thinking deeply of his troubles, and pitied\
      himself terribly. Yet in his fur coat, with frogs across the\
      breast, his top hat aslant, driving this beautiful woman, he had\
      never felt more distinguished.\
\
      A coster, however, taking his girl for a Sunday airing, seemed to\
      have the same impression about himself. This person had flogged\
      his donkey into a gallop alongside, and sat, upright as a\
      waxwork, in his shallopy chariot, his chin settled pompously on a\
      red handkerchief, like Swithin\'92s on his full cravat; while his\
      girl, with the ends of a fly-blown boa floating out behind, aped\
      a woman of fashion. Her swain moved a stick with a ragged bit of\
      string dangling from the end, reproducing with strange fidelity\
      the circular flourish of Swithin\'92s whip, and rolled his head at\
      his lady with a leer that had a weird likeness to Swithin\'92s\
      primeval stare.\
\
      Though for a time unconscious of the lowly ruffian\'92s presence,\
      Swithin presently took it into his head that he was being guyed.\
      He laid his whip-lash across the mares flank. The two chariots,\
      however, by some unfortunate fatality continued abreast.\
      Swithin\'92s yellow, puffy face grew red; he raised his whip to lash\
      the costermonger, but was saved from so far forgetting his\
      dignity by a special intervention of Providence. A carriage\
      driving out through a gate forced phaeton and donkey-cart into\
      proximity; the wheels grated, the lighter vehicle skidded, and\
      was overturned.\
\
      Swithin did not look round. On no account would he have pulled up\
      to help the ruffian. Serve him right if he had broken his neck!\
\
      But he could not if he would. The greys had taken alarm. The\
      phaeton swung from side to side, and people raised frightened\
      faces as they went dashing past. Swithin\'92s great arms, stretched\
      at full length, tugged at the reins. His cheeks were puffed, his\
      lips compressed, his swollen face was of a dull, angry red.\
\
      Irene had her hand on the rail, and at every lurch she gripped it\
      tightly. Swithin heard her ask:\
\
      \'93Are we going to have an accident, Uncle Swithin?\'94\
\
      He gasped out between his pants: \'93It\'92s nothing; a\'97little fresh!\'94\
\
      \'93I\'92ve never been in an accident.\'94\
\
      \'93Don\'92t you move!\'94 He took a look at her. She was smiling,\
      perfectly calm. \'93Sit still,\'94 he repeated. \'93Never fear, I\'92ll get\
      you home!\'94\
\
      And in the midst of all his terrible efforts, he was surprised to\
      hear her answer in a voice not like her own:\
\
      _\'93I don\'92t care if I never get home!\'94_\
\
      The carriage giving a terrific lurch, Swithin\'92s exclamation was\
      jerked back into his throat. The horses, winded by the rise of a\
      hill, now steadied to a trot, and finally stopped of their own\
      accord.\
\
      \'93When\'94\'97Swithin described it at Timothy\'92s\'97\'93I pulled \'92em up, there\
      she was as cool as myself. God bless my soul! she behaved as if\
      she didn\'92t care whether she broke her neck or not! What was it\
      she said: \'91I don\'92t care if I never get home?\'92 Leaning over the\
      handle of his cane, he wheezed out, to Mrs. Small\'92s terror: \'93And\
      I\'92m not altogether surprised, with a finickin\'92 feller like young\
      Soames for a husband!\'94\
\
      It did not occur to him to wonder what Bosinney had done after\
      they had left him there alone; whether he had gone wandering\
      about like the dog to which Swithin had compared him; wandering\
      down to that copse where the spring was still in riot, the cuckoo\
      still calling from afar; gone down there with her handkerchief\
      pressed to lips, its fragrance mingling with the scent of mint\
      and thyme. Gone down there with such a wild, exquisite pain in\
      his heart that he could have cried out among the trees. Or what,\
      indeed, the fellow had done. In fact, till he came to Timothy\'92s,\
      Swithin had forgotten all about him.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER IV JAMES GOES TO SEE FOR HIMSELF\
\
      Those ignorant of Forsyte \'92Change would not, perhaps, foresee all\
      the stir made by Irene\'92s visit to the house.\
\
      After Swithin had related at Timothy\'92s the full story of his\
      memorable drive, the same, with the least suspicion of curiosity,\
      the merest touch of malice, and a real desire to do good, was\
      passed on to June.\
\
      \'93And what a _dreadful_ thing to say, my dear!\'94 ended Aunt Juley;\
      \'93that about not going home. What did she mean?\'94\
\
      It was a strange recital for the girl. She heard it flushing\
      painfully, and, suddenly, with a curt handshake, took her\
      departure.\
\
      \'93Almost rude!\'94 Mrs. Small said to Aunt Hester, when June was\
      gone.\
\
      The proper construction was put on her reception of the news. She\
      was upset. Something was therefore very wrong. Odd! She and Irene\
      had been such friends!\
\
      It all tallied too well with whispers and hints that had been\
      going about for some time past. Recollections of Euphemia\'92s\
      account of the visit to the theatre\'97Mr. Bosinney always at\
      Soames\'92s? Oh, indeed! Yes, of course, he _would_ be\'97about the\
      house! Nothing open. Only upon the greatest, the most important\
      provocation was it necessary to say anything open on Forsyte\
      \'92Change. This machine was too nicely adjusted; a hint, the merest\
      trifling expression of regret or doubt, sufficed to set the\
      family soul so sympathetic\'97vibrating. No one desired that harm\
      should come of these vibrations\'97far from it; they were set in\
      motion with the best intentions, with the feeling that each\
      member of the family had a stake in the family soul.\
\
      And much kindness lay at the bottom of the gossip; it would\
      frequently result in visits of condolence being made, in\
      accordance with the customs of Society, thereby conferring a real\
      benefit upon the sufferers, and affording consolation to the\
      sound, who felt pleasantly that someone at all events was\
      suffering from that from which they themselves were not\
      suffering. In fact, it was simply a desire to keep things\
      well-aired, the desire which animates the Public Press, that\
      brought James, for instance, into communication with Mrs.\
      Septimus, Mrs. Septimus, with the little Nicholases, the little\
      Nicholases with who-knows-whom, and so on. That great class to\
      which they had risen, and now belonged, demanded a certain\
      candour, a still more certain reticence. This combination\
      guaranteed their membership.\
\
      Many of the younger Forsytes felt, very naturally, and would\
      openly declare, that they did not want their affairs pried into;\
      but so powerful was the invisible, magnetic current of family\
      gossip, that for the life of them they could not help knowing all\
      about everything. It was felt to be hopeless.\
\
      One of them (young Roger) had made an heroic attempt to free the\
      rising generation, by speaking of Timothy as an \'93old cat.\'94 The\
      effort had justly recoiled upon himself; the words, coming round\
      in the most delicate way to Aunt Juley\'92s ears, were repeated by\
      her in a shocked voice to Mrs. Roger, whence they returned again\
      to young Roger.\
\
      And, after all, it was only the wrong-doers who suffered; as, for\
      instance, George, when he lost all that money playing billiards;\
      or young Roger himself, when he was so dreadfully near to\
      marrying the girl to whom, it was whispered, he was already\
      married by the laws of Nature; or again Irene, who was thought,\
      rather than said, to be in danger.\
\
      All this was not only pleasant but salutary. And it made so many\
      hours go lightly at Timothy\'92s in the Bayswater Road; so many\
      hours that must otherwise have been sterile and heavy to those\
      three who lived there; and Timothy\'92s was but one of hundreds of\
      such homes in this City of London\'97the homes of neutral persons of\
      the secure classes, who are out of the battle themselves, and\
      must find their reason for existing, in the battles of others.\
\
      But for the sweetness of family gossip, it must indeed have been\
      lonely there. Rumours and tales, reports, surmises\'97were they not\
      the children of the house, as dear and precious as the prattling\
      babes the brother and sisters had missed in their own journey? To\
      talk about them was as near as they could get to the possession\
      of all those children and grandchildren, after whom their soft\
      hearts yearned. For though it is doubtful whether Timothy\'92s heart\
      yearned, it is indubitable that at the arrival of each fresh\
      Forsyte child he was quite upset.\
\
      Useless for young Roger to say, \'93Old cat!\'94 for Euphemia to hold\
      up her hands and cry: \'93Oh! those three!\'94 and break into her\
      silent laugh with the squeak at the end. Useless, and not too\
      kind.\
\
      The situation which at this stage might seem, and especially to\
      Forsyte eyes, strange\'97not to say \'93impossible\'94\'97was, in view of\
      certain facts, not so strange after all.\
\
      Some things had been lost sight of.\
\
      And first, in the security bred of many harmless marriages, it\
      had been forgotten that Love is no hot-house flower, but a wild\
      plant, born of a wet night, born of an hour of sunshine; sprung\
      from wild seed, blown along the road by a wild wind. A wild plant\
      that, when it blooms by chance within the hedge of our gardens,\
      we call a flower; and when it blooms outside we call a weed; but,\
      flower or weed, whose scent and colour are always, wild!\
\
      And further\'97the facts and figures of their own lives being\
      against the perception of this truth\'97it was not generally\
      recognised by Forsytes that, where this wild plant springs, men\
      and women are but moths around the pale, flame-like blossom.\
\
      It was long since young Jolyon\'92s escapade\'97there was danger of a\
      tradition again arising that people in their position never cross\
      the hedge to pluck that flower; that one could reckon on having\
      love, like measles, once in due season, and getting over it\
      comfortably for all time\'97as with measles, on a soothing mixture\
      of butter and honey\'97in the arms of wedlock.\
\
      Of all those whom this strange rumour about Bosinney and Mrs.\
      Soames reached, James was the most affected. He had long\
      forgotten how he had hovered, lanky and pale, in side whiskers of\
      chestnut hue, round Emily, in the days of his own courtship. He\
      had long forgotten the small house in the purlieus of Mayfair,\
      where he had spent the early days of his married life, or rather,\
      he had long forgotten the early days, not the small house,\'97a\
      Forsyte never forgot a house\'97he had afterwards sold it at a clear\
      profit of four hundred pounds.\
\
      He had long forgotten those days, with their hopes and fears and\
      doubts about the prudence of the match (for Emily, though pretty,\
      had nothing, and he himself at that time was making a bare\
      thousand a year), and that strange, irresistible attraction which\
      had drawn him on, till he felt he must die if he could not marry\
      the girl with the fair hair, looped so neatly back, the fair arms\
      emerging from a skin-tight bodice, the fair form decorously\
      shielded by a cage of really stupendous circumference.\
\
      James had passed through the fire, but he had passed also through\
      the river of years which washes out the fire; he had experienced\
      the saddest experience of all\'97forgetfulness of what it was like\
      to be in love.\
\
      Forgotten! Forgotten so long, that he had forgotten even that he\
      had forgotten.\
\
      And now this rumour had come upon him, this rumour about his\
      son\'92s wife; very vague, a shadow dodging among the palpable,\
      straightforward appearances of things, unreal, unintelligible as\
      a ghost, but carrying with it, like a ghost, inexplicable terror.\
\
      He tried to bring it home to his mind, but it was no more use\
      than trying to apply to himself one of those tragedies he read of\
      daily in his evening paper. He simply could not. There could be\
      nothing in it. It was all their nonsense. She didn\'92t get on with\
      Soames as well as she might, but she was a good little thing\'97a\
      good little thing!\
\
      Like the not inconsiderable majority of men, James relished a\
      nice little bit of scandal, and would say, in a matter-of-fact\
      tone, licking his lips, \'93Yes, yes\'97she and young Dyson; they tell\
      me they\'92re living at Monte Carlo!\'94\
\
      But the significance of an affair of this sort\'97of its past, its\
      present, or its future\'97had never struck him. What it meant, what\
      torture and raptures had gone to its construction, what slow,\
      overmastering fate had lurked within the facts, very naked,\
      sometimes sordid, but generally spicy, presented to his gaze. He\
      was not in the habit of blaming, praising, drawing deductions, or\
      generalizing at all about such things; he simply listened rather\
      greedily, and repeated what he was told, finding considerable\
      benefit from the practice, as from the consumption of a sherry\
      and bitters before a meal.\
\
      Now, however, that such a thing\'97or rather the rumour, the breath\
      of it\'97had come near him personally, he felt as in a fog, which\
      filled his mouth full of a bad, thick flavour, and made it\
      difficult to draw breath.\
\
      A scandal! A possible scandal!\
\
      To repeat this word to himself thus was the only way in which he\
      could focus or make it thinkable. He had forgotten the sensations\
      necessary for understanding the progress, fate, or meaning of any\
      such business; he simply could no longer grasp the possibilities\
      of people running any risk for the sake of passion.\
\
      Amongst all those persons of his acquaintance, who went into the\
      City day after day and did their business there, whatever it was,\
      and in their leisure moments bought shares, and houses, and ate\
      dinners, and played games, as he was told, it would have seemed\
      to him ridiculous to suppose that there were any who would run\
      risks for the sake of anything so recondite, so figurative, as\
      passion.\
\
      Passion! He seemed, indeed, to have heard of it, and rules such\
      as \'93A young man and a young woman ought never to be trusted\
      together\'94 were fixed in his mind as the parallels of latitude are\
      fixed on a map (for all Forsytes, when it comes to \'93bed-rock\'94\
      matters of fact, have quite a fine taste in realism); but as to\
      anything else\'97well, he could only appreciate it at all through\
      the catch-word \'93scandal.\'94\
\
      Ah! but there was no truth in it\'97could not be. He was not afraid;\
      she was really a good little thing. But there it was when you got\
      a thing like that into your mind. And James was of a nervous\
      temperament\'97one of those men whom things will not leave alone,\
      who suffer tortures from anticipation and indecision. For fear of\
      letting something slip that he might otherwise secure, he was\
      physically unable to make up his mind until absolutely certain\
      that, by not making it up, he would suffer loss.\
\
      In life, however, there were many occasions when the business of\
      making up his mind did not even rest with himself, and this was\
      one of them.\
\
      What could he do? Talk it over with Soames? That would only make\
      matters worse. And, after all, there was nothing in it, he felt\
      sure.\
\
      It was all that house. He had mistrusted the idea from the first.\
      What did Soames want to go into the country for? And, if he must\
      go spending a lot of money building himself a house, why not have\
      a first-rate man, instead of this young Bosinney, whom nobody\
      knew anything about? He had told them how it would be. And he had\
      heard that the house was costing Soames a pretty penny beyond\
      what he had reckoned on spending.\
\
      This fact, more than any other, brought home to James the real\
      danger of the situation. It was always like this with these\
      \'93artistic\'94 chaps; a sensible man should have nothing to say to\
      them. He had warned Irene, too. And see what had come of it!\
\
      And it suddenly sprang into James\'92s mind that he ought to go and\
      see for himself. In the midst of that fog of uneasiness in which\
      his mind was enveloped the notion that he could go and look at\
      the house afforded him inexplicable satisfaction. It may have\
      been simply the decision to do something\'97more possibly the fact\
      that he was going to look at a house\'97that gave him relief. He\
      felt that in staring at an edifice of bricks and mortar, of wood\
      and stone, built by the suspected man himself, he would be\
      looking into the heart of that rumour about Irene.\
\
      Without saying a word, therefore, to anyone, he took a hansom to\
      the station and proceeded by train to Robin Hill; thence\'97there\
      being no \'93flies,\'94 in accordance with the custom of the\
      neighbourhood\'97he found himself obliged to walk.\
\
      He started slowly up the hill, his angular knees and high\
      shoulders bent complainingly, his eyes fixed on his feet, yet,\
      neat for all that, in his high hat and his frock-coat, on which\
      was the speckless gloss imparted by perfect superintendence.\
      Emily saw to that; that is, she did not, of course, see to\
      it\'97people of good position not seeing to each other\'92s buttons,\
      and Emily was of good position\'97but she saw that the butler saw to\
      it.\
\
      He had to ask his way three times; on each occasion he repeated\
      the directions given him, got the man to repeat them, then\
      repeated them a second time, for he was naturally of a talkative\
      disposition, and one could not be too careful in a new\
      neighbourhood.\
\
      He kept assuring them that it was a new house he was looking for;\
      it was only, however, when he was shown the roof through the\
      trees that he could feel really satisfied that he had not been\
      directed entirely wrong.\
\
      A heavy sky seemed to cover the world with the grey whiteness of\
      a whitewashed ceiling. There was no freshness or fragrance in the\
      air. On such a day even British workmen scarcely cared to do more\
      then they were obliged, and moved about their business without\
      the drone of talk which whiles away the pangs of labour.\
\
      Through spaces of the unfinished house, shirt-sleeved figures\
      worked slowly, and sounds arose\'97spasmodic knockings, the scraping\
      of metal, the sawing of wood, with the rumble of wheelbarrows\
      along boards; now and again the foreman\'92s dog, tethered by a\
      string to an oaken beam, whimpered feebly, with a sound like the\
      singing of a kettle.\
\
      The fresh-fitted window-panes, daubed each with a white patch in\
      the centre, stared out at James like the eyes of a blind dog.\
\
      And the building chorus went on, strident and mirthless under the\
      grey-white sky. But the thrushes, hunting amongst the\
      fresh-turned earth for worms, were silent quite.\
\
      James picked his way among the heaps of gravel\'97the drive was\
      being laid\'97till he came opposite the porch. Here he stopped and\
      raised his eyes. There was but little to see from this point of\
      view, and that little he took in at once; but he stayed in this\
      position many minutes, and who shall know of what he thought.\
\
      His china-blue eyes under white eyebrows that jutted out in\
      little horns, never stirred; the long upper lip of his wide\
      mouth, between the fine white whiskers, twitched once or twice;\
      it was easy to see from that anxious rapt expression, whence\
      Soames derived the handicapped look which sometimes came upon his\
      face. James might have been saying to himself: \'93I don\'92t\
      know\'97life\'92s a tough job.\'94\
\
      In this position Bosinney surprised him.\
\
      James brought his eyes down from whatever bird\'92s-nest they had\
      been looking for in the sky to Bosinney\'92s face, on which was a\
      kind of humorous scorn.\
\
      \'93How do you do, Mr. Forsyte? Come down to see for yourself?\'94\
\
      It was exactly what James, as we know, had come for, and he was\
      made correspondingly uneasy. He held out his hand, however,\
      saying:\
\
      \'93How are you?\'94 without looking at Bosinney.\
\
      The latter made way for him with an ironical smile.\
\
      James scented something suspicious in this courtesy. \'93I should\
      like to walk round the outside first,\'94 he said, \'93and see what\
      you\'92ve been doing!\'94\
\
      A flagged terrace of rounded stones with a list of two or three\
      inches to port had been laid round the south-east and south-west\
      sides of the house, and ran with a bevelled edge into mould,\
      which was in preparation for being turfed; along this terrace\
      James led the way.\
\
      \'93Now what did _this_ cost?\'94 he asked, when he saw the terrace\
      extending round the corner.\
\
      \'93What should you think?\'94 inquired Bosinney.\
\
      \'93How should I know?\'94 replied James somewhat nonplussed; \'93two or\
      three hundred, I dare say!\'94\
\
      \'93The exact sum!\'94\
\
      James gave him a sharp look, but the architect appeared\
      unconscious, and he put the answer down to mishearing.\
\
      On arriving at the garden entrance, he stopped to look at the\
      view.\
\
      \'93That ought to come down,\'94 he said, pointing to the oak-tree.\
\
      \'93You think so? You think that with the tree there you don\'92t get\
      enough view for your money.\'94\
\
      Again James eyed him suspiciously\'97this young man had a peculiar\
      way of putting things: \'93Well!\'94 he said, with a perplexed,\
      nervous, emphasis, \'93I don\'92t see what you want with a tree.\'94\
\
      \'93It shall come down to-morrow,\'94 said Bosinney.\
\
      James was alarmed. \'93Oh,\'94 he said, \'93don\'92t go saying I said it was\
      to come down! _I_ know nothing about it!\'94\
\
      \'93No?\'94\
\
      James went on in a fluster: \'93Why, what should I know about it?\
      It\'92s nothing to do with me! You do it on your own\
      responsibility.\'94\
\
      \'93You\'92ll allow me to mention your name?\'94\
\
      James grew more and more alarmed: \'93I don\'92t know what you want\
      mentioning my name for,\'94 he muttered; \'93you\'92d better leave the\
      tree alone. It\'92s not your tree!\'94\
\
      He took out a silk handkerchief and wiped his brow. They entered\
      the house. Like Swithin, James was impressed by the inner\
      court-yard.\
\
      \'93You must have spent a deuce of a lot of money here,\'94 he said,\
      after staring at the columns and gallery for some time. \'93Now,\
      what did it cost to put up those columns?\'94\
\
      \'93I can\'92t tell you off-hand,\'94 thoughtfully answered Bosinney, \'93but\
      I know it was a deuce of a lot!\'94\
\
      \'93I should think so,\'94 said James. \'93I should....\'94 He caught the\
      architect\'92s eye, and broke off. And now, whenever he came to\
      anything of which he desired to know the cost, he stifled that\
      curiosity.\
\
      Bosinney appeared determined that he should see everything, and\
      had not James been of too \'93noticing\'94 a nature, he would certainly\
      have found himself going round the house a second time. He seemed\
      so anxious to be asked questions, too, that James felt he must be\
      on his guard. He began to suffer from his exertions, for, though\
      wiry enough for a man of his long build, he was seventy-five\
      years old.\
\
      He grew discouraged; he seemed no nearer to anything, had not\
      obtained from his inspection any of the knowledge he had vaguely\
      hoped for. He had merely increased his dislike and mistrust of\
      this young man, who had tired him out with his politeness, and in\
      whose manner he now certainly detected mockery.\
\
      The fellow was sharper than he had thought, and better-looking\
      than he had hoped. He had a\'97a \'93don\'92t care\'94 appearance that James,\
      to whom risk was the most intolerable thing in life, did not\
      appreciate; a peculiar smile, too, coming when least expected;\
      and very queer eyes. He reminded James, as he said afterwards, of\
      a hungry cat. This was as near as he could get, in conversation\
      with Emily, to a description of the peculiar exasperation,\
      velvetiness, and mockery, of which Bosinney\'92s manner had been\
      composed.\
\
      At last, having seen all that was to be seen, he came out again\
      at the door where he had gone in; and now, feeling that he was\
      wasting time and strength and money, all for nothing, he took the\
      courage of a Forsyte in both hands, and, looking sharply at\
      Bosinney, said:\
\
      \'93I dare say you see a good deal of my daughter-in-law; now, what\
      does _she_ think of the house? But she hasn\'92t seen it, I\
      suppose?\'94\
\
      This he said, knowing all about Irene\'92s visit not, of course,\
      that there was anything in the visit, except that extraordinary\
      remark she had made about \'93not caring to get home\'94\'97and the story\
      of how June had taken the news!\
\
      He had determined, by this way of putting the question, to give\
      Bosinney a chance, as he said to himself.\
\
      The latter was long in answering, but kept his eyes with\
      uncomfortable steadiness on James.\
\
      \'93She _has_ seen the house, but I can\'92t tell you what she thinks\
      of it.\'94\
\
      Nervous and baffled, James was constitutionally prevented from\
      letting the matter drop.\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 he said, \'93she has seen it? Soames brought her down, I\
      suppose?\'94\
\
      Bosinney smilingly replied: \'93Oh, no!\'94\
\
      \'93What, did she come down alone?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, no!\'94\
\
      \'93Then\'97who brought her?\'94\
\
      \'93I really don\'92t know whether I ought to tell you who brought\
      her.\'94\
\
      To James, who knew that it was Swithin, this answer appeared\
      incomprehensible.\
\
      \'93Why!\'94 he stammered, \'93you know that....\'94 but he stopped, suddenly\
      perceiving his danger.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said, \'93if you don\'92t want to tell me I suppose you\
      won\'92t! Nobody tells me anything.\'94\
\
      Somewhat to his surprise Bosinney asked him a question.\
\
      \'93By the by,\'94 he said, \'93could you tell me if there are likely to\
      be any more of you coming down? I should like to be on the spot!\'94\
\
      \'93Any more?\'94 said James bewildered, \'93who should there be more? I\
      don\'92t know of any more. Good-bye.\'94\
\
      Looking at the ground he held out his hand, crossed the palm of\
      it with Bosinney\'92s, and taking his umbrella just above the silk,\
      walked away along the terrace.\
\
      Before he turned the corner he glanced back, and saw Bosinney\
      following him slowly\'97\'93slinking along the wall\'94 as he put it to\
      himself, \'93like a great cat.\'94 He paid no attention when the young\
      fellow raised his hat.\
\
      Outside the drive, and out of sight, he slackened his pace still\
      more. Very slowly, more bent than when he came, lean, hungry, and\
      disheartened, he made his way back to the station.\
\
      The Buccaneer, watching him go so sadly home, felt sorry perhaps\
      for his behaviour to the old man.\
\
\
      CHAPTER V SOAMES AND BOSINNEY CORRESPOND\
\
      James said nothing to his son of this visit to the house; but,\
      having occasion to go to Timothy\'92s one morning on a matter\
      connected with a drainage scheme which was being forced by the\
      sanitary authorities on his brother, he mentioned it there.\
\
      It was not, he said, a bad house. He could see that a good deal\
      could be made of it. The fellow was clever in his way, though\
      what it was going to cost Soames before it was done with he\
      didn\'92t know.\
\
      Euphemia Forsyte, who happened to be in the room\'97she had come\
      round to borrow the Rev. Mr. Scoles\'92 last novel, \'93Passion and\
      Paregoric\'94, which was having such a vogue\'97chimed in.\
\
      \'93I saw Irene yesterday at the Stores; she and Mr. Bosinney were\
      having a nice little chat in the Groceries.\'94\
\
      It was thus, simply, that she recorded a scene which had really\
      made a deep and complicated impression on her. She had been\
      hurrying to the silk department of the Church and Commercial\
      Stores\'97that Institution than which, with its admirable system,\
      admitting only guaranteed persons on a basis of payment before\
      delivery, no emporium can be more highly recommended to\
      Forsytes\'97to match a piece of prunella silk for her mother, who\
      was waiting in the carriage outside.\
\
      Passing through the Groceries her eye was unpleasantly attracted\
      by the back view of a very beautiful figure. It was so charmingly\
      proportioned, so balanced, and so well clothed, that Euphemia\'92s\
      instinctive propriety was at once alarmed; such figures, she\
      knew, by intuition rather than experience, were rarely connected\
      with virtue\'97certainly never in her mind, for her own back was\
      somewhat difficult to fit.\
\
      Her suspicions were fortunately confirmed. A young man coming\
      from the Drugs had snatched off his hat, and was accosting the\
      lady with the unknown back.\
\
      It was then that she saw with whom she had to deal; the lady was\
      undoubtedly Mrs. Soames, the young man Mr. Bosinney. Concealing\
      herself rapidly over the purchase of a box of Tunisian dates, for\
      she was impatient of awkwardly meeting people with parcels in her\
      hands, and at the busy time of the morning, she was quite\
      unintentionally an interested observer of their little interview.\
\
      Mrs. Soames, usually somewhat pale, had a delightful colour in\
      her cheeks; and Mr. Bosinney\'92s manner was strange, though\
      attractive (she thought him rather a distinguished-looking man,\
      and George\'92s name for him, \'93The Buccaneer\'94\'97about which there was\
      something romantic\'97quite charming). He seemed to be pleading.\
      Indeed, they talked so earnestly\'97or, rather, he talked so\
      earnestly, for Mrs. Soames did not say much\'97that they caused,\
      inconsiderately, an eddy in the traffic. One nice old General,\
      going towards Cigars, was obliged to step quite out of the way,\
      and chancing to look up and see Mrs. Soames\'92s face, he actually\
      took off his hat, the old fool! So like a man!\
\
      But it was Mrs. Soames\'92 eyes that worried Euphemia. She never\
      once looked at Mr. Bosinney until he moved on, and then she\
      looked after him. And, oh, that look!\
\
      On that look Euphemia had spent much anxious thought. It is not\
      too much to say that it had hurt her with its dark, lingering\
      softness, for all the world as though the woman wanted to drag\
      him back, and unsay something she had been saying.\
\
      Ah, well, she had had no time to go deeply into the matter just\
      then, with that prunella silk on her hands; but she was \'93very\
      _intrigu\'e9e_\'94\'97very! She had just nodded to Mrs. Soames, to show\
      her that she had seen; and, as she confided, in talking it over\
      afterwards, to her chum Francie (Roger\'92s daughter), \'93Didn\'92t she\
      look caught out just?...\'94\
\
      James, most averse at the first blush to accepting any news\
      confirmatory of his own poignant suspicions, took her up at once.\
\
      \'93Oh\'94 he said, \'93they\'92d be after wall-papers no doubt.\'94\
\
      Euphemia smiled. \'93In the Groceries?\'94 she said softly; and, taking\
      \'93Passion and Paregoric\'94 from the table, added: \'93And so you\'92ll\
      lend me this, dear Auntie? Good-bye!\'94 and went away.\
\
      James left almost immediately after; he was late as it was.\
\
      When he reached the office of Forsyte, Bustard and Forsyte, he\
      found Soames, sitting in his revolving, chair, drawing up a\
      defence. The latter greeted his father with a curt good-morning,\
      and, taking an envelope from his pocket, said:\
\
      \'93It may interest you to look through this.\'94\
\
      James read as follows:\
\
      \'93309D, SLOANE STREET,\
      \'93_May_ 15,\
\
      \'93DEAR FORSYTE,\
          \'93The construction of your house being now completed, my\
          duties as architect have come to an end. If I am to go on\
          with the business of decoration, which at your request I\
          undertook, I should like you to clearly understand that I\
          must have a free hand.\
          \'93You never come down without suggesting something that goes\
          counter to my scheme. I have here three letters from you,\
          each of which recommends an article I should never dream of\
          putting in. I had your father here yesterday afternoon, who\
          made further valuable suggestions.\
          \'93Please make up your mind, therefore, whether you want me to\
          decorate for you, or to retire which on the whole I should\
          prefer to do.\
          \'93But understand that, if I decorate, I decorate alone,\
          without interference of any sort.\
          \'93If I do the thing, I will do it thoroughly, but I must have\
          a free hand.\
\
      \'93Yours truly,\
      \'93PHILIP BOSINNEY.\'94\
\
      The exact and immediate cause of this letter cannot, of course,\
      be told, though it is not improbable that Bosinney may have been\
      moved by some sudden revolt against his position towards\
      Soames\'97that eternal position of Art towards Property\'97which is so\
      admirably summed up, on the back of the most indispensable of\
      modern appliances, in a sentence comparable to the very finest in\
      Tacitus:\
\
      THOS. T. SORROW,\
          Inventor.\
\
      BERT M. PADLAND,\
          Proprietor.\
\
      \'93What are you going to say to him?\'94 James asked.\
\
      Soames did not even turn his head. \'93I haven\'92t made up my mind,\'94\
      he said, and went on with his defence.\
\
      A client of his, having put some buildings on a piece of ground\
      that did not belong to him, had been suddenly and most\
      irritatingly warned to take them off again. After carefully going\
      into the facts, however, Soames had seen his way to advise that\
      his client had what was known as a title by possession, and that,\
      though undoubtedly the ground did not belong to him, he was\
      entitled to keep it, and had better do so; and he was now\
      following up this advice by taking steps to\'97as the sailors\
      say\'97\'93make it so.\'94\
\
      He had a distinct reputation for sound advice; people saying of\
      him: \'93Go to young Forsyte\'97a long-headed fellow!\'94 and he prized\
      this reputation highly.\
\
      His natural taciturnity was in his favour; nothing could be more\
      calculated to give people, especially people with property\
      (Soames had no other clients), the impression that he was a safe\
      man. And he was safe. Tradition, habit, education, inherited\
      aptitude, native caution, all joined to form a solid professional\
      honesty, superior to temptation\'97from the very fact that it was\
      built on an innate avoidance of risk. How could he fall, when his\
      soul abhorred circumstances which render a fall possible\'97a man\
      cannot fall off the floor!\
\
      And those countless Forsytes, who, in the course of innumerable\
      transactions concerned with property of all sorts (from wives to\
      water rights), had occasion for the services of a safe man, found\
      it both reposeful and profitable to confide in Soames. That\
      slight superciliousness of his, combined with an air of mousing\
      amongst precedents, was in his favour too\'97a man would not be\
      supercilious unless he knew!\
\
      He was really at the head of the business, for though James still\
      came nearly every day to, see for himself, he did little now but\
      sit in his chair, twist his legs, slightly confuse things already\
      decided, and presently go away again, and the other partner,\
      Bustard, was a poor thing, who did a great deal of work, but\
      whose opinion was never taken.\
\
      So Soames went steadily on with his defence. Yet it would be idle\
      to say that his mind was at ease. He was suffering from a sense\
      of impending trouble, that had haunted him for some time past. He\
      tried to think it physical\'97a condition of his liver\'97but knew that\
      it was not.\
\
      He looked at his watch. In a quarter of an hour he was due at the\
      General Meeting of the New Colliery Company\'97one of Uncle Jolyon\'92s\
      concerns; he should see Uncle Jolyon there, and say something to\
      him about Bosinney\'97he had not made up his mind what, but\
      something\'97in any case he should not answer this letter until he\
      had seen Uncle Jolyon. He got up and methodically put away the\
      draft of his defence. Going into a dark little cupboard, he\
      turned up the light, washed his hands with a piece of brown\
      Windsor soap, and dried them on a roller towel. Then he brushed\
      his hair, paying strict attention to the parting, turned down the\
      light, took his hat, and saying he would be back at half-past\
      two, stepped into the Poultry.\
\
      It was not far to the Offices of the New Colliery Company in\
      Ironmonger Lane, where, and not at the Cannon Street Hotel, in\
      accordance with the more ambitious practice of other companies,\
      the General Meeting was always held. Old Jolyon had from the\
      first set his face against the Press. What business\'97he said\'97had\
      the Public with his concerns!\
\
      Soames arrived on the stroke of time, and took his seat alongside\
      the Board, who, in a row, each Director behind his own ink-pot,\
      faced their Shareholders.\
\
      In the centre of this row old Jolyon, conspicuous in his black,\
      tightly-buttoned frock-coat and his white moustaches, was leaning\
      back with finger tips crossed on a copy of the Directors\'92 report\
      and accounts.\
\
      On his right hand, always a little larger than life, sat the\
      Secretary, \'93Down-by-the-starn\'94 Hemmings; an all-too-sad sadness\
      beaming in his fine eyes; his iron-grey beard, in mourning like\
      the rest of him, giving the feeling of an all-too-black tie\
      behind it.\
\
      The occasion indeed was a melancholy one, only six weeks having\
      elapsed since that telegram had come from Scorrier, the mining\
      expert, on a private mission to the Mines, informing them that\
      Pippin, their Superintendent, had committed suicide in\
      endeavouring, after his extraordinary two years\'92 silence, to\
      write a letter to his Board. That letter was on the table now; it\
      would be read to the Shareholders, who would of course be put\
      into possession of all the facts.\
\
      Hemmings had often said to Soames, standing with his coat-tails\
      divided before the fireplace:\
\
      \'93What our Shareholders don\'92t know about our affairs isn\'92t worth\
      knowing. You may take that from me, Mr. Soames.\'94\
\
      On one occasion, old Jolyon being present, Soames recollected a\
      little unpleasantness. His uncle had looked up sharply and said:\
      \'93Don\'92t talk nonsense, Hemmings! You mean that what they _do_ know\
      isn\'92t worth knowing!\'94 Old Jolyon detested humbug.\
\
      Hemmings, angry-eyed, and wearing a smile like that of a trained\
      poodle, had replied in an outburst of artificial applause: \'93Come,\
      now, that\'92s good, sir\'97that\'92s very good. Your uncle _will_ have\
      his joke!\'94\
\
      The next time he had seen Soames he had taken the opportunity of\
      saying to him: \'93The chairman\'92s getting very old!\'97I can\'92t get him\
      to understand things; and he\'92s so wilful\'97but what can you expect,\
      with a chin like his?\'94\
\
      Soames had nodded.\
\
      Everyone knew that Uncle Jolyon\'92s chin was a caution. He was\
      looking worried to-day, in spite of his General Meeting look; he\
      (Soames) should certainly speak to him about Bosinney.\
\
      Beyond old Jolyon on the left was little Mr. Booker, and he, too,\
      wore his General Meeting look, as though searching for some\
      particularly tender shareholder. And next him was the deaf\
      director, with a frown; and beyond the deaf director, again, was\
      old Mr. Bleedham, very bland, and having an air of conscious\
      virtue\'97as well he might, knowing that the brown-paper parcel he\
      always brought to the Board-room was concealed behind his hat\
      (one of that old-fashioned class, of flat-brimmed top-hats which\
      go with very large bow ties, clean-shaven lips, fresh cheeks, and\
      neat little, white whiskers).\
\
      Soames always attended the General Meeting; it was considered\
      better that he should do so, in case \'93anything should arise!\'94 He\
      glanced round with his close, supercilious air at the walls of\
      the room, where hung plans of the mine and harbour, together with\
      a large photograph of a shaft leading to a working which had\
      proved quite remarkably unprofitable. This photograph\'97a witness\
      to the eternal irony underlying commercial enterprise\'97still\
      retained its position on the wall, an effigy of the directors\'92\
      pet, but dead, lamb.\
\
      And now old Jolyon rose, to present the report and accounts.\
\
      Veiling under a Jove-like serenity that perpetual antagonism\
      deep-seated in the bosom of a director towards his shareholders,\
      he faced them calmly. Soames faced them too. He knew most of them\
      by sight. There was old Scrubsole, a tar man, who always came, as\
      Hemmings would say, \'93to make himself nasty,\'94 a\
      cantankerous-looking old fellow with a red face, a jowl, and an\
      enormous low-crowned hat reposing on his knee. And the Rev. Mr.\
      Boms, who always proposed a vote of thanks to the chairman, in\
      which he invariably expressed the hope that the Board would not\
      forget to elevate their employees, using the word with a double\
      e, as being more vigorous and Anglo-Saxon (he had the strong\
      Imperialistic tendencies of his cloth). It was his salutary\
      custom to buttonhole a director afterwards, and ask him whether\
      he thought the coming year would be good or bad; and, according\
      to the trend of the answer, to buy or sell three shares within\
      the ensuing fortnight.\
\
      And there was that military man, Major O\'92Bally, who could not\
      help speaking, if only to second the re-election of the auditor,\
      and who sometimes caused serious consternation by taking\
      toasts\'97proposals rather\'97out of the hands of persons who had been\
      flattered with little slips of paper, entrusting the said\
      proposals to their care.\
\
      These made up the lot, together with four or five strong, silent\
      shareholders, with whom Soames could sympathize\'97men of business,\
      who liked to keep an eye on their affairs for themselves, without\
      being fussy\'97good, solid men, who came to the City every day and\
      went back in the evening to good, solid wives.\
\
      Good, solid wives! There was something in that thought which\
      roused the nameless uneasiness in Soames again.\
\
      What should he say to his uncle? What answer should he make to\
      this letter?\
\
      . . . . \'93If any shareholder has any question to put, I shall be\
      glad to answer it.\'94 A soft thump. Old Jolyon had let the report\
      and accounts fall, and stood twisting his tortoise-shell glasses\
      between thumb and forefinger.\
\
      The ghost of a smile appeared on Soames\'92s face. They had better\
      hurry up with their questions! He well knew his uncle\'92s method\
      (the ideal one) of at once saying: \'93I propose, then, that the\
      report and accounts be adopted!\'94 Never let them get their\
      wind\'97shareholders were notoriously wasteful of time!\
\
      A tall, white-bearded man, with a gaunt, dissatisfied face,\
      arose:\
\
      \'93I believe I am in order, Mr. Chairman, in raising a question on\
      this figure of \'a35000 in the accounts. \'91To the widow and family\'92\'94\
      (he looked sourly round), \'93\'91of our late superintendent,\'92 who\
      so\'97er\'97ill-advisedly (I say\'97ill-advisedly) committed suicide, at a\
      time when his services were of the utmost value to this Company.\
      You have stated that the agreement which he has so unfortunately\
      cut short with his own hand was for a period of five years, of\
      which one only had expired\'97I\'97\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon made a gesture of impatience.\
\
      \'93I believe I am in order, Mr. Chairman\'97I ask whether this amount\
      paid, or proposed to be paid, by the Board to the er\'97deceased\'97is\
      for services which might have been rendered to the Company\'97had he\
      not committed suicide?\'94\
\
      \'93It is in recognition of past services, which we all know\'97you as\
      well as any of us\'97to have been of vital value.\'94\
\
      \'93Then, sir, all I have to say is that the services being past,\
      the amount is too much.\'94\
\
      The shareholder sat down.\
\
      Old Jolyon waited a second and said: \'93I now propose that the\
      report and\'97\'94\
\
      The shareholder rose again: \'93May I ask if the Board realizes that\
      it is not their money which\'97I don\'92t hesitate to say that if it\
      were their money....\'94\
\
      A second shareholder, with a round, dogged face, whom Soames\
      recognised as the late superintendent\'92s brother-in-law, got up\
      and said warmly: \'93In my opinion, sir, the sum is not enough!\'94\
\
      The Rev. Mr. Boms now rose to his feet. \'93If I may venture to\
      express myself,\'94 he said, \'93I should say that the fact of\
      the\'97er\'97deceased having committed suicide should weigh very\
      heavily\'97_very_ heavily with our worthy chairman. I have no doubt\
      it has weighed with him, for\'97I say this for myself and I think\
      for everyone present (hear, hear)\'97he enjoys our confidence in a\
      high degree. We all desire, I should hope, to be charitable. But\
      I feel sure\'94 (he-looked severely at the late superintendent\'92s\
      brother-in-law) \'93that he will in some way, by some written\
      expression, or better perhaps by reducing the amount, record our\
      grave disapproval that so promising and valuable a life should\
      have been thus impiously removed from a sphere where both its own\
      interests and\'97if I may say so\'97our interests so imperatively\
      demanded its continuance. We should not\'97nay, we may\
      not\'97countenance so grave a dereliction of all duty, both human\
      and divine.\'94\
\
      The reverend gentleman resumed his seat. The late\
      superintendent\'92s brother-in-law again rose: \'93What I have said I\
      stick to,\'94 he said; \'93the amount is not enough!\'94\
\
      The first shareholder struck in: \'93I challenge the legality of the\
      payment. In my opinion this payment is not legal. The Company\'92s\
      solicitor is present; I believe I am in order in asking him the\
      question.\'94\
\
      All eyes were now turned upon Soames. Something had arisen!\
\
      He stood up, close-lipped and cold; his nerves inwardly\
      fluttered, his attention tweaked away at last from contemplation\
      of that cloud looming on the horizon of his mind.\
\
      \'93The point,\'94 he said in a low, thin voice, \'93is by no means clear.\
      As there is no possibility of future consideration being\
      received, it is doubtful whether the payment is strictly legal.\
      If it is desired, the opinion of the court could be taken.\'94\
\
      The superintendent\'92s brother-in-law frowned, and said in a\
      meaning tone: \'93We have no doubt the opinion of the court could be\
      taken. May I ask the name of the gentleman who has given us that\
      striking piece of information? Mr. Soames Forsyte? Indeed!\'94 He\
      looked from Soames to old Jolyon in a pointed manner.\
\
      A flush coloured Soames\'92s pale cheeks, but his superciliousness\
      did not waver. Old Jolyon fixed his eyes on the speaker.\
\
      \'93If,\'94 he said, \'93the late superintendents brother-in-law has\
      nothing more to say, I propose that the report and accounts....\'94\
\
      At this moment, however, there rose one of those five silent,\
      stolid shareholders, who had excited Soames\'92s sympathy. He said:\
\
      \'93I deprecate the proposal altogether. We are expected to give\
      charity to this man\'92s wife and children, who, you tell us, were\
      dependent on him. They may have been; I do not care whether they\
      were or not. I object to the whole thing on principle. It is high\
      time a stand was made against this sentimental humanitarianism.\
      The country is eaten up with it. I object to my money being paid\
      to these people of whom I know nothing, who have done nothing to\
      earn it. I object _in toto;_ it is not business. I now move that\
      the report and accounts be put back, and amended by striking out\
      the grant altogether.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon had remained standing while the strong, silent man was\
      speaking. The speech awoke an echo in all hearts, voicing, as it\
      did, the worship of strong men, the movement against generosity,\
      which had at that time already commenced among the saner members\
      of the community.\
\
      The words \'93it is not business\'94 had moved even the Board;\
      privately everyone felt that indeed it was not. But they knew\
      also the chairman\'92s domineering temper and tenacity. He, too, at\
      heart must feel that it was not business; but he was committed to\
      his own proposition. Would he go back upon it? It was thought to\
      be unlikely.\
\
      All waited with interest. Old Jolyon held up his hand;\
      dark-rimmed glasses depending between his finger and thumb\
      quivered slightly with a suggestion of menace.\
\
      He addressed the strong, silent shareholder.\
\
      \'93Knowing, as you do, the efforts of our late superintendent upon\
      the occasion of the explosion at the mines, do you seriously wish\
      me to put that amendment, sir?\'94\
\
      \'93I do.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon put the amendment.\
\
      \'93Does anyone second this?\'94 he asked, looking calmly round.\
\
      And it was then that Soames, looking at his uncle, felt the power\
      of will that was in that old man. No one stirred. Looking\
      straight into the eyes of the strong, silent shareholder, old\
      Jolyon said:\
\
      \'93I now move, \'91That the report and accounts for the year 1886 be\
      received and adopted.\'92 You second that? Those in favour signify\
      the same in the usual way. Contrary\'97no. Carried. The next\
      business, gentlemen....\'94\
\
      Soames smiled. Certainly Uncle Jolyon had a way with him!\
\
      But now his attention relapsed upon Bosinney.\
\
      Odd how that fellow haunted his thoughts, even in business hours.\
\
      Irene\'92s visit to the house\'97but there was nothing in that, except\
      that she might have told him; but then, again, she never did tell\
      him anything. She was more silent, more touchy, every day. He\
      wished to God the house were finished, and they were in it, away\
      from London. Town did not suit her; her nerves were not strong\
      enough. That nonsense of the separate room had cropped up again!\
\
      The meeting was breaking up now. Underneath the photograph of the\
      lost shaft Hemmings was buttonholed by the Rev. Mr. Boms. Little\
      Mr. Booker, his bristling eyebrows wreathed in angry smiles, was\
      having a parting turn-up with old Scrubsole. The two hated each\
      other like poison. There was some matter of a tar-contract\
      between them, little Mr. Booker having secured it from the Board\
      for a nephew of his, over old Scrubsole\'92s head. Soames had heard\
      that from Hemmings, who liked a gossip, more especially about his\
      directors, except, indeed, old Jolyon, of whom he was afraid.\
\
      Soames awaited his opportunity. The last shareholder was\
      vanishing through the door, when he approached his uncle, who was\
      putting on his hat.\
\
      \'93Can I speak to you for a minute, Uncle Jolyon?\'94\
\
      It is uncertain what Soames expected to get out of this\
      interview.\
\
      Apart from that somewhat mysterious awe in which Forsytes in\
      general held old Jolyon, due to his philosophic twist, or\
      perhaps\'97as Hemmings would doubtless have said\'97to his chin, there\
      was, and always had been, a subtle antagonism between the younger\
      man and the old. It had lurked under their dry manner of\
      greeting, under their non-committal allusions to each other, and\
      arose perhaps from old Jolyon\'92s perception of the quiet tenacity\
      (\'93obstinacy,\'94 he rather naturally called it) of the young man, of\
      a secret doubt whether he could get his own way with him.\
\
      Both these Forsytes, wide asunder as the poles in many respects,\
      possessed in their different ways\'97to a greater degree than the\
      rest of the family\'97that essential quality of tenacious and\
      prudent insight into \'93affairs,\'94 which is the highwater mark of\
      their great class. Either of them, with a little luck and\
      opportunity, was equal to a lofty career; either of them would\
      have made a good financier, a great contractor, a statesman,\
      though old Jolyon, in certain of his moods when under the\
      influence of a cigar or of Nature\'97would have been capable of, not\
      perhaps despising, but certainly of questioning, his own high\
      position, while Soames, who never smoked cigars, would not.\
\
      Then, too, in old Jolyon\'92s mind there was always the secret ache,\
      that the son of James\'97of James, whom he had always thought such a\
      poor thing, should be pursuing the paths of success, while his\
      own son...!\
\
      And last, not least\'97for he was no more outside the radiation of\
      family gossip than any other Forsyte\'97he had now heard the\
      sinister, indefinite, but none the less disturbing rumour about\
      Bosinney, and his pride was wounded to the quick.\
\
      Characteristically, his irritation turned not against Irene but\
      against Soames. The idea that his nephew\'92s wife (why couldn\'92t the\
      fellow take better care of her\'97Oh! quaint injustice! as though\
      Soames could possibly take more care!)\'97should be drawing to\
      herself Jun\'92s lover, was intolerably humiliating. And seeing the\
      danger, he did not, like James, hide it away in sheer\
      nervousness, but owned with the dispassion of his broader\
      outlook, that it was not unlikely; there was something very\
      attractive about Irene!\
\
      He had a presentiment on the subject of Soames\'92s communication as\
      they left the Board Room together, and went out into the noise\
      and hurry of Cheapside. They walked together a good minute\
      without speaking, Soames with his mousing, mincing step, and old\
      Jolyon upright and using his umbrella languidly as a\
      walking-stick.\
\
      They turned presently into comparative quiet, for old Jolyon\'92s\
      way to a second Board led him in the direction of Moorage Street.\
\
      Then Soames, without lifting his eyes, began: \'93I\'92ve had this\
      letter from Bosinney. You see what he says; I thought I\'92d let you\
      know. I\'92ve spent a lot more than I intended on this house, and I\
      want the position to be clear.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon ran his eyes unwillingly over the letter: \'93What he\
      says is clear enough,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93He talks about \'91a free hand,\'92\'94 replied Soames.\
\
      Old Jolyon looked at him. The long-suppressed irritation and\
      antagonism towards this young fellow, whose affairs were\
      beginning to intrude upon his own, burst from him.\
\
      \'93Well, if you don\'92t trust him, why do you employ him?\'94\
\
      Soames stole a sideway look: \'93It\'92s much too late to go into\
      that,\'94 he said, \'93I only want it to be quite understood that if I\
      give him a free hand, he doesn\'92t let me in. I thought if you were\
      to speak to him, it would carry more weight!\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said old Jolyon abruptly; \'93I\'92ll have nothing to do with\
      it!\'94\
\
      The words of both uncle and nephew gave the impression of\
      unspoken meanings, far more important, behind. And the look they\
      interchanged was like a revelation of this consciousness.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Soames; \'93I thought, for Jun\'92s sake, I\'92d tell you,\
      that\'92s all; I thought you\'92d better know I shan\'92t stand any\
      nonsense!\'94\
\
      \'93What is that to me?\'94 old Jolyon took him up.\
\
      \'93Oh! I don\'92t know,\'94 said Soames, and flurried by that sharp look\
      he was unable to say more. \'93Don\'92t say I didn\'92t tell you,\'94 he\
      added sulkily, recovering his composure.\
\
      \'93Tell me!\'94 said old Jolyon; \'93I don\'92t know what you mean. You come\
      worrying me about a thing like this. _I_ don\'92t want to hear about\
      your affairs; you must manage them yourself!\'94\
\
      \'93Very well,\'94 said Soames immovably, \'93I will!\'94\
\
      \'93Good-morning, then,\'94 said old Jolyon, and they parted.\
\
      Soames retraced his steps, and going into a celebrated\
      eating-house, asked for a plate of smoked salmon and a glass of\
      Chablis; he seldom ate much in the middle of the day, and\
      generally ate standing, finding the position beneficial to his\
      liver, which was very sound, but to which he desired to put down\
      all his troubles.\
\
      When he had finished he went slowly back to his office, with bent\
      head, taking no notice of the swarming thousands on the\
      pavements, who in their turn took no notice of him.\
\
      The evening post carried the following reply to Bosinney:\
\
      \'93FORSYTE, BUSTARD AND FORSYTE,\
      \'93Commissioners for Oaths,\
      \'9392001, BRANCH LANE, POULTRY, E.C.,\
      \'93_May_ 17, 1887.\
\
      \'93DEAR BOSINNEY,\
          \'93I have, received your letter, the terms of which not a\
          little surprise me. I was under the impression that you had,\
          and have had all along, a \'93free hand\'94; for I do not recollect\
          that any suggestions I have been so unfortunate as to make\
          have met with your approval. In giving you, in accordance\
          with your request, this \'93free hand,\'94 I wish you to clearly\
          understand that the total cost of the house as handed over to\
          me completely decorated, inclusive of your fee (as arranged\
          between us), must not exceed twelve thousand pounds\'97\'a312,000.\
          This gives you an ample margin, and, as you know, is far more\
          than I originally contemplated.\
\
      \'93I am,\
      \'93Yours truly,\
      \'93SOAMES FORSYTE.\'94\
\
      On the following day he received a note from Bosinney:\
\
      \'93PHILIP BAYNES BOSINNEY,\
      \'93Architect,\
      \'93309D, SLOANE STREET, S.W.,\
      \'93_May_ 18.\
\
      \'93DEAR FORSYTE,\
          \'93If you think that in such a delicate matter as decoration I\
          can bind myself to the exact pound, I am afraid you are\
          mistaken. I can see that you are tired of the arrangement,\
          and of me, and I had better, therefore, resign.\
\
      \'93Yours faithfully,\
      \'93PHILIP BAYNES BOSINNEY.\'94\
\
      Soames pondered long and painfully over his answer, and late at\
      night in the dining-room, when Irene had gone to bed, he composed\
      the following:\
\
      \'9362, MONTPELLIER SQUARE, S.W.,\
      \'93_May_ 19, 1887.\
\
      \'93DEAR BOSINNEY,\
          \'93I think that in both our interests it would be extremely\
          undesirable that matters should be so left at this stage. I\
          did not mean to say that if you should exceed the sum named\
          in my letter to you by ten or twenty or even fifty pounds,\
          there would be any difficulty between us. This being so, I\
          should like you to reconsider your answer. You have a \'93free\
          hand\'94 in the terms of this correspondence, and I hope you\
          will see your way to completing the decorations, in the\
          matter of which I know it is difficult to be absolutely\
          exact.\
\
      \'93Yours truly,\
      \'93SOAMES FORSYTE.\'94\
\
      Bosinney\'92s answer, which came in the course of the next day, was:\
\
      \'93_May_ 20.\
\
      \'93DEAR FORSYTE,\
          \'93Very well.\
\
      \'93PH. BOSINNEY.\'94\
\
\
      CHAPTER VI OLD JOLYON AT THE ZOO\
\
      Old Jolyon disposed of his second Meeting\'97an ordinary\
      Board\'97summarily. He was so dictatorial that his fellow directors\
      were left in cabal over the increasing domineeringness of old\
      Forsyte, which they were far from intending to stand much longer,\
      they said.\
\
      He went out by Underground to Portland Road Station, whence he\
      took a cab and drove to the Zoo.\
\
      He had an assignation there, one of those assignations that had\
      lately been growing more frequent, to which his increasing\
      uneasiness about June and the \'93change in her,\'94 as he expressed\
      it, was driving him.\
\
      She buried herself away, and was growing thin; if he spoke to her\
      he got no answer, or had his head snapped off, or she looked as\
      if she would burst into tears. She was as changed as she could\
      be, all through this Bosinney. As for telling him about anything,\
      not a bit of it!\
\
      And he would sit for long spells brooding, his paper unread\
      before him, a cigar extinct between his lips. She had been such a\
      companion to him ever since she was three years old! And he loved\
      her so!\
\
      Forces regardless of family or class or custom were beating down\
      his guard; impending events over which he had no control threw\
      their shadows on his head. The irritation of one accustomed to\
      have his way was roused against he knew not what.\
\
      Chafing at the slowness of his cab, he reached the Zoo door; but,\
      with his sunny instinct for seizing the good of each moment, he\
      forgot his vexation as he walked towards the tryst.\
\
      From the stone terrace above the bear-pit his son and his two\
      grandchildren came hastening down when they saw old Jolyon\
      coming, and led him away towards the lion-house. They supported\
      him on either side, holding one to each of his hands,\'97whilst\
      Jolly, perverse like his father, carried his grandfather\'92s\
      umbrella in such a way as to catch people\'92s legs with the crutch\
      of the handle.\
\
      Young Jolyon followed.\
\
      It was as good as a play to see his father with the children, but\
      such a play as brings smiles with tears behind. An old man and\
      two small children walking together can be seen at any hour of\
      the day; but the sight of old Jolyon, with Jolly and Holly seemed\
      to young Jolyon a special peep-show of the things that lie at the\
      bottom of our hearts. The complete surrender of that erect old\
      figure to those little figures on either hand was too poignantly\
      tender, and, being a man of an habitual reflex action, young\
      Jolyon swore softly under his breath. The show affected him in a\
      way unbecoming to a Forsyte, who is nothing if not\
      undemonstrative.\
\
      Thus they reached the lion-house.\
\
      There had been a morning f\'eate at the Botanical Gardens, and a\
      large number of Forsy\'97that is, of well-dressed people who kept\
      carriages had brought them on to the Zoo, so as to have more, if\
      possible, for their money, before going back to Rutland Gate or\
      Bryanston Square.\
\
      \'93Let\'92s go on to the Zoo,\'94 they had said to each other; \'93it\'92ll be\
      great fun!\'94 It was a shilling day; and there would not be all\
      those horrid common people.\
\
      In front of the long line of cages they were collected in rows,\
      watching the tawny, ravenous beasts behind the bars await their\
      only pleasure of the four-and-twenty hours. The hungrier the\
      beast, the greater the fascination. But whether because the\
      spectators envied his appetite, or, more humanely, because it was\
      so soon to be satisfied, young Jolyon could not tell. Remarks\
      kept falling on his ears: \'93That\'92s a nasty-looking brute, that\
      tiger!\'94 \'93Oh, what a love! Look at his little mouth!\'94 \'93Yes, he\'92s\
      rather nice! Don\'92t go too near, mother.\'94\
\
      And frequently, with little pats, one or another would clap their\
      hands to their pockets behind and look round, as though expecting\
      young Jolyon or some disinterested-looking person to relieve them\
      of the contents.\
\
      A well-fed man in a white waistcoat said slowly through his\
      teeth: \'93It\'92s all greed; they can\'92t be hungry. Why, they take no\
      exercise.\'94 At these words a tiger snatched a piece of bleeding\
      liver, and the fat man laughed. His wife, in a Paris model frock\
      and gold nose-nippers, reproved him: \'93How can you laugh, Harry?\
      Such a horrid sight!\'94\
\
      Young Jolyon frowned.\
\
      The circumstances of his life, though he had ceased to take a too\
      personal view of them, had left him subject to an intermittent\
      contempt; and the class to which he had belonged\'97the carriage\
      class\'97especially excited his sarcasm.\
\
      To shut up a lion or tiger in confinement was surely a horrible\
      barbarity. But no cultivated person would admit this.\
\
      The idea of its being barbarous to confine wild animals had\
      probably never even occurred to his father for instance; he\
      belonged to the old school, who considered it at once humanizing\
      and educational to confine baboons and panthers, holding the\
      view, no doubt, that in course of time they might induce these\
      creatures not so unreasonably to die of misery and heart-sickness\
      against the bars of their cages, and put the society to the\
      expense of getting others! In his eyes, as in the eyes of all\
      Forsytes, the pleasure of seeing these beautiful creatures in a\
      state of captivity far outweighed the inconvenience of\
      imprisonment to beasts whom God had so improvidently placed in a\
      state of freedom! It was for the animals\'92 good, removing them at\
      once from the countless dangers of open air and exercise, and\
      enabling them to exercise their functions in the guaranteed\
      seclusion of a private compartment! Indeed, it was doubtful what\
      wild animals were made for but to be shut up in cages!\
\
      But as young Jolyon had in his constitution the elements of\
      impartiality, he reflected that to stigmatize as barbarity that\
      which was merely lack of imagination must be wrong; for none who\
      held these views had been placed in a similar position to the\
      animals they caged, and could not, therefore, be expected to\
      enter into their sensations. It was not until they were leaving\
      the gardens\'97Jolly and Holly in a state of blissful delirium\'97that\
      old Jolyon found an opportunity of speaking to his son on the\
      matter next his heart. \'93I don\'92t know what to make of it,\'94 he\
      said; \'93if she\'92s to go on as she\'92s going on now, I can\'92t tell\
      what\'92s to come. I wanted her to see the doctor, but she won\'92t.\
      She\'92s not a bit like me. She\'92s your mother all over. Obstinate as\
      a mule! If she doesn\'92t want to do a thing, she won\'92t, and there\'92s\
      an end of it!\'94\
\
      Young Jolyon smiled; his eyes had wandered to his father\'92s chin.\
      \'93A pair of you,\'94 he thought, but he said nothing.\
\
      \'93And then,\'94 went on old Jolyon, \'93there\'92s this Bosinney. I should\
      like to punch the fellow\'92s head, but I can\'92t, I suppose, though\'97I\
      don\'92t see why you shouldn\'92t,\'94 he added doubtfully.\
\
      \'93What has he done? Far better that it should come to an end, if\
      they don\'92t hit it off!\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon looked at his son. Now they had actually come to\
      discuss a subject connected with the relations between the sexes\
      he felt distrustful. Jo would be sure to hold some loose view or\
      other.\
\
      \'93Well, I don\'92t know what you think,\'94 he said; \'93I dare say your\
      sympathy\'92s with him\'97shouldn\'92t be surprised; but I think he\'92s\
      behaving precious badly, and if he comes my way I shall tell him\
      so.\'94 He dropped the subject.\
\
      It was impossible to discuss with his son the true nature and\
      meaning of Bosinney\'92s defection. Had not his son done the very\
      same thing (worse, if possible) fifteen years ago? There seemed\
      no end to the consequences of that piece of folly.\
\
      Young Jolyon also was silent; he had quickly penetrated his\
      father\'92s thought, for, dethroned from the high seat of an obvious\
      and uncomplicated view of things, he had become both perceptive\
      and subtle.\
\
      The attitude he had adopted towards sexual matters fifteen years\
      before, however, was too different from his father\'92s. There was\
      no bridging the gulf.\
\
      He said coolly: \'93I suppose he\'92s fallen in love with some other\
      woman?\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon gave him a dubious look: \'93I can\'92t tell,\'94 he said;\
      \'93they say so!\'94\
\
      \'93Then, it\'92s probably true,\'94 remarked young Jolyon unexpectedly;\
      \'93and I suppose _they\'92ve_ told you who she is?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said old Jolyon, \'93Soames\'92s wife!\'94\
\
      Young Jolyon did not whistle: The circumstances of his own life\
      had rendered him incapable of whistling on such a subject, but he\
      looked at his father, while the ghost of a smile hovered over his\
      face.\
\
      If old Jolyon saw, he took no notice.\
\
      \'93She and June were bosom friends!\'94 he muttered.\
\
      \'93Poor little June!\'94 said young Jolyon softly. He thought of his\
      daughter still as a babe of three.\
\
      Old Jolyon came to a sudden halt.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t believe a word of it,\'94 he said, \'93it\'92s some old woman\'92s\
      tale. Get me a cab, Jo, I\'92m tired to death!\'94\
\
      They stood at a corner to see if an empty cab would come along,\
      while carriage after carriage drove past, bearing Forsytes of all\
      descriptions from the Zoo. The harness, the liveries, the gloss\
      on the horses\'92 coats, shone and glittered in the May sunlight,\
      and each equipage, landau, sociable, barouche, Victoria, or\
      brougham, seemed to roll out proudly from its wheels:\
\
      \'93I and my horses and my men you know,\
      Indeed the whole turn-out have cost a pot.\
      But we were worth it every penny. Look\
      At Master and at Missis now, the dawgs!\
      Ease with security\'97ah! that\'92s the ticket!\'94\
\
      And such, as everyone knows, is fit accompaniment for a\
      perambulating Forsyte.\
\
      Amongst these carriages was a barouche coming at a greater pace\
      than the others, drawn by a pair of bright bay horses. It swung\
      on its high springs, and the four people who filled it seemed\
      rocked as in a cradle.\
\
      This chariot attracted young Jolyon\'92s attention; and suddenly, on\
      the back seat, he recognised his Uncle James, unmistakable in\
      spite of the increased whiteness of his whiskers; opposite, their\
      backs defended by sunshades, Rachel Forsyte and her elder but\
      married sister, Winifred Dartie, in irreproachable toilettes, had\
      posed their heads haughtily, like two of the birds they had been\
      seeing at the Zoo; while by James\'92 side reclined Dartie, in a\
      brand-new frock-coat buttoned tight and square, with a large\
      expanse of carefully shot linen protruding below each wristband.\
\
      An extra, if subdued, sparkle, an added touch of the best gloss\
      or varnish characterized this vehicle, and seemed to distinguish\
      it from all the others, as though by some happy extravagance\'97like\
      that which marks out the real \'93work of art\'94 from the ordinary\
      \'93picture\'94\'97it were designated as the typical car, the very throne\
      of Forsytedom.\
\
      Old Jolyon did not see them pass; he was petting poor Holly who\
      was tired, but those in the carriage had taken in the little\
      group; the ladies\'92 heads tilted suddenly, there was a spasmodic\
      screening movement of parasols; James\'92 face protruded naively,\
      like the head of a long bird, his mouth slowly opening. The\
      shield-like rounds of the parasols grew smaller and smaller, and\
      vanished.\
\
      Young Jolyon saw that he had been recognised, even by Winifred,\
      who could not have been more than fifteen when he had forfeited\
      the right to be considered a Forsyte.\
\
      There was not much change in _them!_ He remembered the exact look\
      of their turn-out all that time ago: Horses, men, carriage\'97all\
      different now, no doubt\'97but of the precise stamp of fifteen years\
      before; the same neat display, the same nicely calculated\
      arrogance ease with security! The swing exact, the pose of the\
      sunshades exact, exact the spirit of the whole thing.\
\
      And in the sunlight, defended by the haughty shields of parasols,\
      carriage after carriage went by.\
\
      \'93Uncle James has just passed, with his female folk,\'94 said young\
      Jolyon.\
\
      His father looked black. \'93Did your uncle see us? Yes? Hmph!\
      What\'92s _he_ want, coming down into these parts?\'94\
\
      An empty cab drove up at this moment, and old Jolyon stopped it.\
\
      \'93I shall see you again before long, my boy!\'94 he said. \'93Don\'92t you\
      go paying any attention to what I\'92ve been saying about young\
      Bosinney\'97I don\'92t believe a word of it!\'94\
\
      Kissing the children, who tried to detain him, he stepped in and\
      was borne away.\
\
      Young Jolyon, who had taken Holly up in his arms, stood\
      motionless at the corner, looking after the cab.\
\
\
      CHAPTER VII AFTERNOON AT TIMOTHY\'92S\
\
      If old Jolyon, as he got into his cab, had said: \'93I _won\'92t_\
      believe a word of it!\'94 he would more truthfully have expressed\
      his sentiments.\
\
      The notion that James and his womankind had seen him in the\
      company of his son had awakened in him not only the impatience he\
      always felt when crossed, but that secret hostility natural\
      between brothers, the roots of which\'97little nursery\
      rivalries\'97sometimes toughen and deepen as life goes on, and, all\
      hidden, support a plant capable of producing in season the\
      bitterest fruits.\
\
      Hitherto there had been between these six brothers no more\
      unfriendly feeling than that caused by the secret and natural\
      doubt that the others might be richer than themselves; a feeling\
      increased to the pitch of curiosity by the approach of death\'97that\
      end of all handicaps\'97and the great \'93closeness\'94 of their man of\
      business, who, with some sagacity, would profess to Nicholas\
      ignorance of James\'92 income, to James ignorance of old Jolyon\'92s,\
      to Jolyon ignorance of Roger\'92s, to Roger ignorance of Swithin\'92s,\
      while to Swithin he would say most irritatingly that Nicholas\
      must be a rich man. Timothy alone was exempt, being in gilt-edged\
      securities.\
\
      But now, between two of them at least, had arisen a very\
      different sense of injury. From the moment when James had the\
      impertinence to pry into his affairs\'97as he put it\'97old Jolyon no\
      longer chose to credit this story about Bosinney. His\
      grand-daughter slighted through a member of \'93that fellow\'92s\'94\
      family! He made up his mind that Bosinney was maligned. There\
      must be some other reason for his defection.\
\
      June had flown out at him, or something; she was as touchy as she\
      could be!\
\
      He would, however, let Timothy have a bit of his mind, and see if\
      he would go on dropping hints! And he would not let the grass\
      grow under his feet either, he would go there at once, and take\
      very good care that he didn\'92t have to go again on the same\
      errand.\
\
      He saw James\'92 carriage blocking the pavement in front of \'93The\
      Bower\'94. So they had got there before him\'97cackling about having\
      seen him, he dared say! And further on, Swithin\'92s greys were\
      turning their noses towards the noses of James\'92 bays, as though\
      in conclave over the family, while their coachmen were in\
      conclave above.\
\
      Old Jolyon, depositing his hat on the chair in the narrow hall,\
      where that hat of Bosinney\'92s had so long ago been mistaken for a\
      cat, passed his thin hand grimly over his face with its great\
      drooping white moustaches, as though to remove all traces of\
      expression, and made his way upstairs.\
\
      He found the front drawing-room full. It was full enough at the\
      best of times\'97without visitors\'97without any one in it\'97for Timothy\
      and his sisters, following the tradition of their generation,\
      considered that a room was not quite \'93nice\'94 unless it was\
      \'93properly\'94 furnished. It held, therefore, eleven chairs, a sofa,\
      three tables, two cabinets, innumerable knicknacks, and part of a\
      large grand piano. And now, occupied by Mrs. Small, Aunt Hester,\
      by Swithin, James, Rachel, Winifred, Euphemia, who had come in\
      again to return \'93Passion and Paregoric\'94 which she had read at\
      lunch, and her chum Frances, Roger\'92s daughter (the musical\
      Forsyte, the one who composed songs), there was only one chair\
      left unoccupied, except, of course, the two that nobody ever sat\
      on\'97and the only standing room was occupied by the cat, on whom\
      old Jolyon promptly stepped.\
\
      In these days it was by no means unusual for Timothy to have so\
      many visitors. The family had always, one and all, had a real\
      respect for Aunt Ann, and now that she was gone, they were coming\
      far more frequently to The Bower, and staying longer.\
\
      Swithin had been the first to arrive, and seated torpid in a red\
      satin chair with a gilt back, he gave every appearance of lasting\
      the others out. And symbolizing Bosinney\'92s name \'93the big one,\'94\
      with his great stature and bulk, his thick white hair, his puffy\
      immovable shaven face, he looked more primeval than ever in the\
      highly upholstered room.\
\
      His conversation, as usual of late, had turned at once upon\
      Irene, and he had lost no time in giving Aunts Juley and Hester\
      his opinion with regard to this rumour he heard was going about.\
      No\'97as he said\'97she might want a bit of flirtation\'97a pretty woman\
      must have her fling; but more than that he did not believe.\
      Nothing open; she had too much good sense, too much proper\
      appreciation of what was due to her position, and to the family!\
      No sc\'97, he was going to say \'93scandal\'94 but the very idea was so\
      preposterous that he waved his hand as though to say\'97\'93but let\
      that pass!\'94\
\
      Granted that Swithin took a bachelor\'92s view of the\
      situation\'97still what indeed was not due to that family in which\
      so many had done so well for themselves, had attained a certain\
      position? If he _had_ heard in dark, pessimistic moments the\
      words \'93yeomen\'94 and \'93very small beer\'94 used in connection with his\
      origin, did he believe them?\
\
      No! he cherished, hugging it pathetically to his bosom the secret\
      theory that there was something distinguished somewhere in his\
      ancestry.\
\
      \'93Must be,\'94 he once said to young Jolyon, before the latter went\
      to the bad. \'93Look at us, _we\'92ve_ got on! There must be good blood\
      in us somewhere.\'94\
\
      He had been fond of young Jolyon: the boy had been in a good set\
      at College, had known that old ruffian Sir Charles Fiste\'92s sons\'97a\
      pretty rascal one of them had turned out, too; and there was\
      style about him\'97it was a thousand pities he had run off with that\
      half-foreign governess! If he must go off like that why couldn\'92t\
      he have chosen someone who would have done them credit! And what\
      was he now?\'97an underwriter at Lloyd\'92s; they said he even painted\
      pictures\'97pictures! Damme! he might have ended as Sir Jolyon\
      Forsyte, Bart., with a seat in Parliament, and a place in the\
      country!\
\
      It was Swithin who, following the impulse which sooner or later\
      urges thereto some member of every great family, went to the\
      Heralds\'92 Office, where they assured him that he was undoubtedly\
      of the same family as the well-known Forsites with an \'93i,\'94 whose\
      arms were \'93three dexter buckles on a sable ground gules,\'94 hoping\
      no doubt to get him to take them up.\
\
      Swithin, however, did not do this, but having ascertained that\
      the crest was a \'93pheasant proper,\'94 and the motto \'93For Forsite,\'94\
      he had the pheasant proper placed upon his carriage and the\
      buttons of his coachman, and both crest and motto on his\
      writing-paper. The arms he hugged to himself, partly because, not\
      having paid for them, he thought it would look ostentatious to\
      put them on his carriage, and he hated ostentation, and partly\
      because he, like any practical man all over the country, had a\
      secret dislike and contempt for things he could not understand he\
      found it hard, as anyone might, to swallow \'93three dexter buckles\
      on a sable ground gules.\'94\
\
      He never forgot, however, their having told him that if he paid\
      for them he would be entitled to use them, and it strengthened\
      his conviction that he was a gentleman. Imperceptibly the rest of\
      the family absorbed the \'93pheasant proper,\'94 and some, more serious\
      than others, adopted the motto; old Jolyon, however, refused to\
      use the latter, saying that it was humbug meaning nothing, so far\
      as he could see.\
\
      Among the older generation it was perhaps known at bottom from\
      what great historical event they derived their crest; and if\
      pressed on the subject, sooner than tell a lie\'97they did not like\
      telling lies, having an impression that only Frenchmen and\
      Russians told them\'97they would confess hurriedly that Swithin had\
      got hold of it somehow.\
\
      Among the younger generation the matter was wrapped in a\
      discretion proper. They did not want to hurt the feelings of\
      their elders, nor to feel ridiculous themselves; they simply used\
      the crest....\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Swithin, \'93he had had an opportunity of seeing for\
      himself, and what he should say was, that there was nothing in\
      her manner to that young Buccaneer or Bosinney or whatever his\
      name was, different from her manner to himself; in fact, he\
      should rather say....\'94 But here the entrance of Frances and\
      Euphemia put an unfortunate stop to the conversation, for this\
      was not a subject which could be discussed before young people.\
\
      And though Swithin was somewhat upset at being stopped like this\
      on the point of saying something important, he soon recovered his\
      affability. He was rather fond of Frances\'97Francie, as she was\
      called in the family. She was so smart, and they told him she\
      made a pretty little pot of pin-money by her songs; he called it\
      very clever of her.\
\
      He rather prided himself indeed on a liberal attitude towards\
      women, not seeing any reason why they shouldn\'92t paint pictures,\
      or write tunes, or books even, for the matter of that, especially\
      if they could turn a useful penny by it; not at all\'97kept them out\
      of mischief. It was not as if they were men!\
\
      \'93Little Francie,\'94 as she was usually called with good-natured\
      contempt, was an important personage, if only as a standing\
      illustration of the attitude of Forsytes towards the Arts. She\
      was not really \'93little,\'94 but rather tall, with dark hair for a\
      Forsyte, which, together with a grey eye, gave her what was\
      called \'93a Celtic appearance.\'94 She wrote songs with titles like\
      \'93Breathing Sighs,\'94 or \'93Kiss me, Mother, ere I die,\'94 with a\
      refrain like an anthem:\
    \'93Kiss me, Mother, ere I die;\
     Kiss me-kiss me, Mother, ah!\
     Kiss, ah! kiss me e-ere I\'97\
     Kiss me, Mother, ere I d-d-die!\'94\
\
      She wrote the words to them herself, and other poems. In lighter\
      moments she wrote waltzes, one of which, the \'93Kensington Coil,\'94\
      was almost national to Kensington, having a sweet dip in it.\
      Thus:\
\
\
      It was very original. Then there were her \'93Songs for Little\
      People,\'94 at once educational and witty, especially \'93Gran\'92ma\'92s\
      Porgie,\'94 and that ditty, almost prophetically imbued with the\
      coming Imperial spirit, entitled \'93Black Him In His Little Eye.\'94\
\
      Any publisher would take these, and reviews like \'93High Living,\'94\
      and the \'93Ladies\'92 Genteel Guide\'94 went into raptures over: \'93Another\
      of Miss Francie Forsyte\'92s spirited ditties, sparkling and\
      pathetic. We ourselves were moved to tears and laughter. Miss\
      Forsyte should go far.\'94\
\
      With the true instinct of her breed, Francie had made a point of\
      knowing the right people\'97people who would write about her, and\
      talk about her, and people in Society, too\'97keeping a mental\
      register of just where to exert her fascinations, and an eye on\
      that steady scale of rising prices, which in her mind\'92s eye\
      represented the future. In this way she caused herself to be\
      universally respected.\
\
      Once, at a time when her emotions were whipped by an\
      attachment\'97for the tenor of Roger\'92s life, with its whole-hearted\
      collection of house property, had induced in his only daughter a\
      tendency towards passion\'97she turned to great and sincere work,\
      choosing the sonata form, for the violin. This was the only one\
      of her productions that troubled the Forsytes. They felt at once\
      that it would not sell.\
\
      Roger, who liked having a clever daughter well enough, and often\
      alluded to the amount of pocket-money she made for herself, was\
      upset by this violin sonata.\
\
      \'93Rubbish like that!\'94 he called it. Francie had borrowed young\
      Flageoletti from Euphemia, to play it in the drawing-room at\
      Prince\'92s Gardens.\
\
      As a matter of fact Roger was right. It was rubbish,\
      but\'97annoying! the sort of rubbish that wouldn\'92t sell. As every\
      Forsyte knows, rubbish that sells is not rubbish at all\'97far from\
      it.\
\
      And yet, in spite of the sound common sense which fixed the worth\
      of art at what it would fetch, some of the Forsytes\'97Aunt Hester,\
      for instance, who had always been musical\'97could not help\
      regretting that Francie\'92s music was not \'93classical\'94. the same\
      with her poems. But then, as Aunt Hester said, they didn\'92t see\
      any poetry nowadays, all the poems were \'93little light things.\'94\
      There was nobody who could write a poem like \'93Paradise Lost,\'94 or\
      \'93Childe Harold\'94; either of which made you feel that you really\
      had read something. Still, it was nice for Francie to have\
      something to occupy her; while other girls were spending money\
      shopping she was making it!\
\
      And both Aunt Hester and Aunt Juley were always ready to listen\
      to the latest story of how Francie had got her price increased.\
\
      They listened now, together with Swithin, who sat pretending not\
      to, for these young people talked so fast and mumbled so, he\
      never could catch what they said.\
\
      \'93And I can\'92t think,\'94 said Mrs. Septimus, \'93how you do it. I should\
      never have the audacity!\'94\
\
      Francie smiled lightly. \'93I\'92d much rather deal with a man than a\
      woman. Women are so sharp!\'94\
\
      \'93My dear,\'94 cried Mrs. Small, \'93I\'92m sure we\'92re not.\'94\
\
      Euphemia went off into her silent laugh, and, ending with the\
      squeak, said, as though being strangled: \'93Oh, you\'92ll kill me some\
      day, auntie.\'94\
\
      Swithin saw no necessity to laugh; he detested people laughing\
      when he himself perceived no joke. Indeed, he detested Euphemia\
      altogether, to whom he always alluded as \'93Nick\'92s daughter, what\'92s\
      she called\'97the pale one?\'94 He had just missed being her\
      god-father\'97indeed, would have been, had he not taken a firm stand\
      against her outlandish name. He hated becoming a godfather.\
      Swithin then said to Francie with dignity: \'93It\'92s a fine\
      day\'97er\'97for the time of year.\'94 But Euphemia, who knew perfectly\
      well that he had refused to be her godfather, turned to Aunt\
      Hester, and began telling her how she had seen Irene\'97Mrs.\
      Soames\'97at the Church and Commercial Stores.\
\
      \'93And Soames was with her?\'94 said Aunt Hester, to whom Mrs. Small\
      had as yet had no opportunity of relating the incident.\
\
      \'93_Soames_ with her? Of _course_ not!\'94\
\
      \'93But was she all alone in London?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, no; there was Mr. Bosinney with her. She was _perfectly_\
      dressed.\'94\
\
      But Swithin, hearing the name Irene, looked severely at Euphemia,\
      who, it is true, never did look well in a dress, whatever she may\
      have done on other occasions, and said:\
\
      \'93Dressed like a lady, I\'92ve no doubt. It\'92s a pleasure to see her.\'94\
\
      At this moment James and his daughters were announced. Dartie,\
      feeling badly in want of a drink, had pleaded an appointment with\
      his dentist, and, being put down at the Marble Arch, had got into\
      a hansom, and was already seated in the window of his club in\
      Piccadilly.\
\
      His wife, he told his cronies, had wanted to take him to pay some\
      calls. It was not in his line\'97not exactly. Haw!\
\
      Hailing the waiter, he sent him out to the hall to see what had\
      won the 4.30 race. He was dog-tired, he said, and that was a\
      fact; had been drivin\'92 about with his wife to \'93shows\'94 all the\
      afternoon. Had put his foot down at last. A fellow must live his\
      own life.\
\
      At this moment, glancing out of the bay window\'97for he loved this\
      seat whence he could see everybody pass\'97his eye unfortunately, or\
      perhaps fortunately, chanced to light on the figure of Soames,\
      who was mousing across the road from the Green Park-side, with\
      the evident intention of coming in, for he, too, belonged to \'93The\
      Iseeum.\'94\
\
      Dartie sprang to his feet; grasping his glass, he muttered\
      something about \'93that 4.30 race,\'94 and swiftly withdrew to the\
      card-room, where Soames never came. Here, in complete isolation\
      and a dim light, he lived his own life till half past seven, by\
      which hour he knew Soames must certainly have left the club.\
\
      It would not do, as he kept repeating to himself whenever he felt\
      the impulse to join the gossips in the bay-window getting too\
      strong for him\'97it absolutely would not do, with finances as low\
      as his, and the \'93old man\'94 (James) rusty ever since that business\
      over the oil shares, which was no fault of his, to risk a row\
      with Winifred.\
\
      If Soames were to see him in the club it would be sure to come\
      round to her that he wasn\'92t at the dentist\'92s at all. He never\
      knew a family where things \'93came round\'94 so. Uneasily, amongst the\
      green baize card-tables, a frown on his olive coloured face, his\
      check trousers crossed, and patent-leather boots shining through\
      the gloom, he sat biting his forefinger, and wondering where the\
      deuce he was to get the money if Erotic failed to win the\
      Lancashire Cup.\
\
      His thoughts turned gloomily to the Forsytes. What a set they\
      were! There was no getting anything out of them\'97at least, it was\
      a matter of extreme difficulty. They were so d\'97-d particular\
      about money matters; not a sportsman amongst the lot, unless it\
      were George. That fellow Soames, for instance, would have a fit\
      if you tried to borrow a tenner from him, or, if he didn\'92t have a\
      fit, he looked at you with his cursed supercilious smile, as if\
      you were a lost soul because you were in want of money.\
\
      And that wife of his (Dartie\'92s mouth watered involuntarily), he\
      had tried to be on good terms with her, as one naturally would\
      with any pretty sister-in-law, but he would be cursed if the (he\
      mentally used a coarse word)\'97would have anything to say to\
      him\'97she looked at him, indeed, as if he were dirt\'97and yet she\
      could go far enough, he wouldn\'92t mind betting. He knew women;\
      they weren\'92t made with soft eyes and figures like that for\
      nothing, as that fellow Soames would jolly soon find out, if\
      there were anything in what he had heard about this Buccaneer\
      Johnny.\
\
      Rising from his chair, Dartie took a turn across the room, ending\
      in front of the looking-glass over the marble chimney-piece; and\
      there he stood for a long time contemplating in the glass the\
      reflection of his face. It had that look, peculiar to some men,\
      of having been steeped in linseed oil, with its waxed dark\
      moustaches and the little distinguished commencements of side\
      whiskers; and concernedly he felt the promise of a pimple on the\
      side of his slightly curved and fattish nose.\
\
      In the meantime old Jolyon had found the remaining chair in\
      Timothy\'92s commodious drawing-room. His advent had obviously put a\
      stop to the conversation, decided awkwardness having set in. Aunt\
      Juley, with her well-known kindheartedness, hastened to set\
      people at their ease again.\
\
      \'93Yes, Jolyon,\'94 she said, \'93we were just saying that you haven\'92t\
      been here for a long time; but we mustn\'92t be surprised. You\'92re\
      busy, of course? James was just saying what a busy time of\
      year....\'94\
\
      \'93Was he?\'94 said old Jolyon, looking hard at James. \'93It wouldn\'92t be\
      half so busy if everybody minded their own business.\'94\
\
      James, brooding in a small chair from which his knees ran uphill,\
      shifted his feet uneasily, and put one of them down on the cat,\
      which had unwisely taken refuge from old Jolyon beside him.\
\
      \'93Here, you\'92ve got a cat here,\'94 he said in an injured voice,\
      withdrawing his foot nervously as he felt it squeezing into the\
      soft, furry body.\
\
      \'93Several,\'94 said old Jolyon, looking at one face and another; \'93I\
      trod on one just now.\'94\
\
      A silence followed.\
\
      Then Mrs. Small, twisting her fingers and gazing round with\
      \'93pathetic calm\'94, asked: \'93And how is dear June?\'94\
\
      A twinkle of humour shot through the sternness of old Jolyon\'92s\
      eyes. Extraordinary old woman, Juley! No one quite like her for\
      saying the wrong thing!\
\
      \'93Bad!\'94 he said; \'93London don\'92t agree with her\'97too many people\
      about, too much clatter and chatter by half.\'94 He laid emphasis on\
      the words, and again looked James in the face.\
\
      Nobody spoke.\
\
      A feeling of its being too dangerous to take a step in any\
      direction, or hazard any remark, had fallen on them all.\
      Something of the sense of the impending, that comes over the\
      spectator of a Greek tragedy, had entered that upholstered room,\
      filled with those white-haired, frock-coated old men, and\
      fashionably attired women, who were all of the same blood,\
      between all of whom existed an unseizable resemblance.\
\
      Not that they were conscious of it\'97the visits of such fateful,\
      bitter spirits are only felt.\
\
      Then Swithin rose. He would not sit there, feeling like that\'97he\
      was not to be put down by anyone! And, manoeuvring round the room\
      with added pomp, he shook hands with each separately.\
\
      \'93You tell Timothy from me,\'94 he said, \'93that he coddles himself too\
      much!\'94 Then, turning to Francie, whom he considered \'93smart,\'94 he\
      added: \'93You come with me for a drive one of these days.\'94 But this\
      conjured up the vision of that other eventful drive which had\
      been so much talked about, and he stood quite still for a second,\
      with glassy eyes, as though waiting to catch up with the\
      significance of what he himself had said; then, suddenly\
      recollecting that he didn\'92t care a damn, he turned to old Jolyon:\
      \'93Well, good-bye, Jolyon! You shouldn\'92t go about without an\
      overcoat; you\'92ll be getting sciatica or something!\'94 And, kicking\
      the cat slightly with the pointed tip of his patent leather boot,\
      he took his huge form away.\
\
      When he had gone everyone looked secretly at the others, to see\
      how they had taken the mention of the word \'93drive\'94\'97the word which\
      had become famous, and acquired an overwhelming importance, as\
      the only official\'97so to speak\'97news in connection with the vague\
      and sinister rumour clinging to the family tongue.\
\
      Euphemia, yielding to an impulse, said with a short laugh: \'93I\'92m\
      glad Uncle Swithin doesn\'92t ask me to go for drives.\'94\
\
      Mrs. Small, to reassure her and smooth over any little\
      awkwardness the subject might have, replied: \'93My dear, he likes\
      to take somebody well dressed, who will do him a little credit. I\
      shall never forget the drive he took me. It was an experience!\'94\
      And her chubby round old face was spread for a moment with a\
      strange contentment; then broke into pouts, and tears came into\
      her eyes. She was thinking of that long ago driving tour she had\
      once taken with Septimus Small.\
\
      James, who had relapsed into his nervous brooding in the little\
      chair, suddenly roused himself: \'93He\'92s a funny fellow, Swithin,\'94\
      he said, but in a half-hearted way.\
\
      Old Jolyon\'92s silence, his stern eyes, held them all in a kind of\
      paralysis. He was disconcerted himself by the effect of his own\
      words\'97an effect which seemed to deepen the importance of the very\
      rumour he had come to scotch; but he was still angry.\
\
      He had not done with them yet\'97No, no\'97he would give them another\
      rub or two.\
\
      He did not wish to rub his nieces, he had no quarrel with them\'97a\
      young and presentable female always appealed to old Jolyon\'92s\
      clemency\'97but that fellow James, and, in a less degree perhaps,\
      those others, deserved all they would get. And he, too, asked for\
      Timothy.\
\
      As though feeling that some danger threatened her younger\
      brother, Aunt Juley suddenly offered him tea: \'93There it is,\'94 she\
      said, \'93all cold and nasty, waiting for you in the back drawing\
      room, but Smither shall make you some fresh.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon rose: \'93Thank you,\'94 he said, looking straight at James,\
      \'93but I\'92ve no time for tea, and\'97scandal, and the rest of it! It\'92s\
      time I was at home. Good-bye, Julia; good-bye, Hester; good-bye,\
      Winifred.\'94\
\
      Without more ceremonious adieux, he marched out.\
\
      Once again in his cab, his anger evaporated, for so it ever was\
      with his wrath\'97when he had rapped out, it was gone. Sadness came\
      over his spirit. He had stopped their mouths, maybe, but at what\
      a cost! At the cost of certain knowledge that the rumour he had\
      been resolved not to believe was true. June was abandoned, and\
      for the wife of that fellow\'92s son! He felt it was true, and\
      hardened himself to treat it as if it were not; but the pain he\
      hid beneath this resolution began slowly, surely, to vent itself\
      in a blind resentment against James and his son.\
\
      The six women and one man left behind in the little drawing-room\
      began talking as easily as might be after such an occurrence, for\
      though each one of them knew for a fact that he or she never\
      talked scandal, each one of them also knew that the other six\
      did; all were therefore angry and at a loss. James only was\
      silent, disturbed, to the bottom of his soul.\
\
      Presently Francie said: \'93Do you know, I think Uncle Jolyon is\
      terribly changed this last year. What do you think, Aunt Hester?\'94\
\
      Aunt Hester made a little movement of recoil: \'93Oh, ask your Aunt\
      Julia!\'94 she said; \'93I know nothing about it.\'94\
\
      No one else was afraid of assenting, and James muttered gloomily\
      at the floor: \'93He\'92s not half the man he was.\'94\
\
      \'93I\'92ve noticed it a long time,\'94 went on Francie; \'93he\'92s aged\
      tremendously.\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley shook her head; her face seemed suddenly to have\
      become one immense pout.\
\
      \'93Poor dear Jolyon,\'94 she said, \'93somebody ought to see to it for\
      him!\'94\
\
      There was again silence; then, as though in terror of being left\
      solitarily behind, all five visitors rose simultaneously, and\
      took their departure.\
\
      Mrs. Small, Aunt Hester, and their cat were left once more alone,\
      the sound of a door closing in the distance announced the\
      approach of Timothy.\
\
      That evening, when Aunt Hester had just got off to sleep in the\
      back bedroom that used to be Aunt Juley\'92s before Aunt Juley took\
      Aunt Ann\'92s, her door was opened, and Mrs. Small, in a pink\
      night-cap, a candle in her hand, entered: \'93Hester!\'94 she said.\
      \'93Hester!\'94\
\
      Aunt Hester faintly rustled the sheet.\
\
      \'93Hester,\'94 repeated Aunt Juley, to make quite sure that she had\
      awakened her, \'93I am quite troubled about poor dear Jolyon.\
      _What_,\'94 Aunt Juley dwelt on the word, \'93do you think ought to be\
      done?\'94\
\
      Aunt Hester again rustled the sheet, her voice was heard faintly\
      pleading: \'93Done? How should I know?\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley turned away satisfied, and closing the door with extra\
      gentleness so as not to disturb dear Hester, let it slip through\
      her fingers and fall to with a \'93crack.\'94\
\
      Back in her own room, she stood at the window gazing at the moon\
      over the trees in the Park, through a chink in the muslin\
      curtains, close drawn lest anyone should see. And there, with her\
      face all round and pouting in its pink cap, and her eyes wet, she\
      thought of \'93dear Jolyon,\'94 so old and so lonely, and how she could\
      be of some use to him; and how he would come to love her, as she\
      had never been loved since\'97since poor Septimus went away.\
\
\
      CHAPTER VIII DANCE AT ROGER\'92S\
\
      Roger\'92s house in Prince\'92s Gardens was brilliantly alight. Large\
      numbers of wax candles had been collected and placed in cut-glass\
      chandeliers, and the parquet floor of the long, double\
      drawing-room reflected these constellations. An appearance of\
      real spaciousness had been secured by moving out all the\
      furniture on to the upper landings, and enclosing the room with\
      those strange appendages of civilization known as \'93rout\'94 seats.\
      In a remote corner, embowered in palms, was a cottage piano, with\
      a copy of the \'93Kensington Coil\'94 open on the music-stand.\
\
      Roger had objected to a band. He didn\'92t see in the least what\
      they wanted with a band; he wouldn\'92t go to the expense, and there\
      was an end of it. Francie (her mother, whom Roger had long since\
      reduced to chronic dyspepsia, went to bed on such occasions), had\
      been obliged to content herself with supplementing the piano by a\
      young man who played the cornet, and she so arranged with palms\
      that anyone who did not look into the heart of things might\
      imagine there were several musicians secreted there. She made up\
      her mind to tell them to play loud\'97there was a lot of music in a\
      cornet, if the man would only put his soul into it.\
\
      In the more cultivated American tongue, she was \'93through\'94 at\
      last\'97through that tortuous labyrinth of make-shifts, which must\
      be traversed before fashionable display can be combined with the\
      sound economy of a Forsyte. Thin but brilliant, in her\
      maize-coloured frock with much tulle about the shoulders, she\
      went from place to place, fitting on her gloves, and casting her\
      eye over it all.\
\
      To the hired butler (for Roger only kept maids) she spoke about\
      the wine. Did he quite understand that Mr. Forsyte wished a dozen\
      bottles of the champagne from Whiteley\'92s to be put out? But if\
      that were finished (she did not suppose it would be, most of the\
      ladies would drink water, no doubt), but if it were, there was\
      the champagne cup, and he must do the best he could with that.\
\
      She hated having to say this sort of thing to a butler, it was so\
      _infra dig.;_ but what could you do with father? Roger, indeed,\
      after making himself consistently disagreeable about the dance,\
      would come down presently, with his fresh colour and bumpy\
      forehead, as though he had been its promoter; and he would smile,\
      and probably take the prettiest woman in to supper; and at two\
      o\'92clock, just as they were getting into the swing, he would go up\
      secretly to the musicians and tell them to play \'93God Save the\
      Queen,\'94 and go away.\
\
      Francie devoutly hoped he might soon get tired, and slip off to\
      bed.\
\
      The three or four devoted girl friends who were staying in the\
      house for this dance had partaken with her, in a small, abandoned\
      room upstairs, of tea and cold chicken-legs, hurriedly served;\
      the men had been sent out to dine at Eustace\'92s Club, it being\
      felt that they must be fed up.\
\
      Punctually on the stroke of nine arrived Mrs. Small alone. She\
      made elaborate apologies for the absence of Timothy, omitting all\
      mention of Aunt Hester, who, at the last minute, had said she\
      could not be bothered. Francie received her effusively, and\
      placed her on a rout seat, where she left her, pouting and\
      solitary in lavender-coloured satin\'97the first time she had worn\
      colour since Aunt Ann\'92s death.\
\
      The devoted maiden friends came now from their rooms, each by\
      magic arrangement in a differently coloured frock, but all with\
      the same liberal allowance of tulle on the shoulders and at the\
      bosom\'97for they were, by some fatality, lean to a girl. They were\
      all taken up to Mrs. Small. None stayed with her more than a few\
      seconds, but clustering together talked and twisted their\
      programmes, looking secretly at the door for the first appearance\
      of a man.\
\
      Then arrived in a group a number of Nicholases, always\
      punctual\'97the fashion up Ladbroke Grove way; and close behind them\
      Eustace and his men, gloomy and smelling rather of smoke.\
\
      Three or four of Francie\'92s lovers now appeared, one after the\
      other; she had made each promise to come early. They were all\
      clean-shaven and sprightly, with that peculiar kind of young-man\
      sprightliness which had recently invaded Kensington; they did not\
      seem to mind each other\'92s presence in the least, and wore their\
      ties bunching out at the ends, white waistcoats, and socks with\
      clocks. All had handkerchiefs concealed in their cuffs. They\
      moved buoyantly, each armoured in professional gaiety, as though\
      he had come to do great deeds. Their faces when they danced, far\
      from wearing the traditional solemn look of the dancing\
      Englishman, were irresponsible, charming, suave; they bounded,\
      twirling their partners at great pace, without pedantic attention\
      to the rhythm of the music.\
\
      At other dancers they looked with a kind of airy scorn\'97they, the\
      light brigade, the heroes of a hundred Kensington \'93hops\'94\'97from\
      whom alone could the right manner and smile and step be hoped.\
\
      After this the stream came fast; chaperones silting up along the\
      wall facing the entrance, the volatile element swelling the eddy\
      in the larger room.\
\
      Men were scarce, and wallflowers wore their peculiar, pathetic\
      expression, a patient, sourish smile which seemed to say: \'93Oh,\
      no! don\'92t mistake me, _I_ know you are not coming up to me. I can\
      hardly expect that!\'94 And Francie would plead with one of her\
      lovers, or with some callow youth: \'93Now, to please me, do let me\
      introduce you to Miss Pink; such a nice girl, really!\'94 and she\
      would bring him up, and say: \'93Miss Pink\'97Mr. Gathercole. Can you\
      spare him a dance?\'94 Then Miss Pink, smiling her forced smile,\
      colouring a little, answered: \'93Oh! I think so!\'94 and screening her\
      empty card, wrote on it the name of Gathercole, spelling it\
      passionately in the district that he proposed, about the second\
      extra.\
\
      But when the youth had murmured that it was hot, and passed, she\
      relapsed into her attitude of hopeless expectation, into her\
      patient, sourish smile.\
\
      Mothers, slowly fanning their faces, watched their daughters, and\
      in their eyes could be read all the story of those daughters\'92\
      fortunes. As for themselves, to sit hour after hour, dead tired,\
      silent, or talking spasmodically\'97what did it matter, so long as\
      the girls were having a good time! But to see them neglected and\
      passed by! Ah! they smiled, but their eyes stabbed like the eyes\
      of an offended swan; they longed to pluck young Gathercole by the\
      slack of his dandified breeches, and drag him to their\
      daughters\'97the jackanapes!\
\
      And all the cruelties and hardness of life, its pathos and\
      unequal chances, its conceit, self-forgetfulness, and patience,\
      were presented on the battle-field of this Kensington ball-room.\
\
      Here and there, too, lovers\'97not lovers like Francie\'92s, a peculiar\
      breed, but simply lovers\'97trembling, blushing, silent, sought each\
      other by flying glances, sought to meet and touch in the mazes of\
      the dance, and now and again dancing together, struck some\
      beholder by the light in their eyes.\
\
      Not a second before ten o\'92clock came the Jameses\'97Emily, Rachel,\
      Winifred (Dartie had been left behind, having on a former\
      occasion drunk too much of Roger\'92s champagne), and Cicely, the\
      youngest, making her debut; behind them, following in a hansom\
      from the paternal mansion where they had dined, Soames and Irene.\
\
      All these ladies had shoulder-straps and no tulle\'97thus showing at\
      once, by a bolder exposure of flesh, that they came from the more\
      fashionable side of the Park.\
\
      Soames, sidling back from the contact of the dancers, took up a\
      position against the wall. Guarding himself with his pale smile,\
      he stood watching. Waltz after waltz began and ended, couple\
      after couple brushed by with smiling lips, laughter, and snatches\
      of talk; or with set lips, and eyes searching the throng; or\
      again, with silent, parted lips, and eyes on each other. And the\
      scent of festivity, the odour of flowers, and hair, of essences\
      that women love, rose suffocatingly in the heat of the summer\
      night.\
\
      Silent, with something of scorn in his smile, Soames seemed to\
      notice nothing; but now and again his eyes, finding that which\
      they sought, would fix themselves on a point in the shifting\
      throng, and the smile die off his lips.\
\
      He danced with no one. Some fellows danced with their wives; his\
      sense of \'93form\'94 had never permitted him to dance with Irene since\
      their marriage, and the God of the Forsytes alone can tell\
      whether this was a relief to him or not.\
\
      She passed, dancing with other men, her dress, iris-coloured,\
      floating away from her feet. She danced well; he was tired of\
      hearing women say with an acid smile: \'93How beautifully your wife\
      dances, Mr. Forsyte\'97it\'92s quite a pleasure to watch her!\'94 Tired of\
      answering them with his sidelong glance: \'93You think so?\'94\
\
      A young couple close by flirted a fan by turns, making an\
      unpleasant draught. Francie and one of her lovers stood near.\
      They were talking of love.\
\
      He heard Roger\'92s voice behind, giving an order about supper to a\
      servant. Everything was very second-class! He wished that he had\
      not come! He had asked Irene whether she wanted him; she had\
      answered with that maddening smile of hers \'93Oh, no!\'94\
\
      Why _had_ he come? For the last quarter of an hour he had not\
      even seen her. Here was George advancing with his Quilpish face;\
      it was too late to get out of his way.\
\
      \'93Have you seen \'91The Buccaneer\'92.\'94 said this licensed wag; \'93he\'92s on\
      the warpath\'97hair cut and everything!\'94\
\
      Soames said he had not, and crossing the room, half-empty in an\
      interval of the dance, he went out on the balcony, and looked\
      down into the street.\
\
      A carriage had driven up with late arrivals, and round the door\
      hung some of those patient watchers of the London streets who\
      spring up to the call of light or music; their faces, pale and\
      upturned above their black and rusty figures, had an air of\
      stolid watching that annoyed Soames. Why were they allowed to\
      hang about; why didn\'92t the bobby move them on?\
\
      But the policeman took no notice of them; his feet were planted\
      apart on the strip of crimson carpet stretched across the\
      pavement; his face, under the helmet, wore the same stolid,\
      watching look as theirs.\
\
      Across the road, through the railings, Soames could see the\
      branches of trees shining, faintly stirring in the breeze, by the\
      gleam of the street lamps; beyond, again, the upper lights of the\
      houses on the other side, so many eyes looking down on the quiet\
      blackness of the garden; and over all, the sky, that wonderful\
      London sky, dusted with the innumerable reflection of countless\
      lamps; a dome woven over between its stars with the refraction of\
      human needs and human fancies\'97immense mirror of pomp and misery\
      that night after night stretches its kindly mocking over miles of\
      houses and gardens, mansions and squalor, over Forsytes,\
      policemen, and patient watchers in the streets.\
\
      Soames turned away, and, hidden in the recess, gazed into the\
      lighted room. It was cooler out there. He saw the new arrivals,\
      June and her grandfather, enter. What had made them so late? They\
      stood by the doorway. They looked fagged. Fancy Uncle Jolyon\
      turning out at this time of night! Why hadn\'92t June come to Irene,\
      as she usually did, and it occurred to him suddenly that he had\
      seen nothing of June for a long time now.\
\
      Watching her face with idle malice, he saw it change, grow so\
      pale that he thought she would drop, then flame out crimson.\
      Turning to see at what she was looking, he saw his wife on\
      Bosinney\'92s arm, coming from the conservatory at the end of the\
      room. Her eyes were raised to his, as though answering some\
      question he had asked, and he was gazing at her intently.\
\
      Soames looked again at June. Her hand rested on old Jolyon\'92s arm;\
      she seemed to be making a request. He saw a surprised look on his\
      uncle\'92s face; they turned and passed through the door out of his\
      sight.\
\
      The music began again\'97a waltz\'97and, still as a statue in the\
      recess of the window, his face unmoved, but no smile on his lips,\
      Soames waited. Presently, within a yard of the dark balcony, his\
      wife and Bosinney passed. He caught the perfume of the gardenias\
      that she wore, saw the rise and fall of her bosom, the languor in\
      her eyes, her parted lips, and a look on her face that he did not\
      know. To the slow, swinging measure they danced by, and it seemed\
      to him that they clung to each other; he saw her raise her eyes,\
      soft and dark, to Bosinney\'92s, and drop them again.\
\
      Very white, he turned back to the balcony, and leaning on it,\
      gazed down on the Square; the figures were still there looking up\
      at the light with dull persistency, the policeman\'92s face, too,\
      upturned, and staring, but he saw nothing of them. Below, a\
      carriage drew up, two figures got in, and drove away....\
\
      That evening June and old Jolyon sat down to dinner at the usual\
      hour. The girl was in her customary high-necked frock, old Jolyon\
      had not dressed.\
\
      At breakfast she had spoken of the dance at Uncle Roger\'92s, she\
      wanted to go; she had been stupid enough, she said, not to think\
      of asking anyone to take her. It was too late now.\
\
      Old Jolyon lifted his keen eyes. June was used to go to dances\
      with Irene as a matter of course! and deliberately fixing his\
      gaze on her, he asked: \'93Why don\'92t you get Irene?\'94\
\
      No! June did not want to ask Irene; she would only go if\'97if her\
      grandfather wouldn\'92t mind just for once for a little time!\
\
      At her look, so eager and so worn, old Jolyon had grumblingly\
      consented. He did not know what she wanted, he said, with going\
      to a dance like this, a poor affair, he would wager; and she no\
      more fit for it than a cat! What she wanted was sea air, and\
      after his general meeting of the Globular Gold Concessions he was\
      ready to take her. She didn\'92t want to go away? Ah! she would\
      knock herself up! Stealing a mournful look at her, he went on\
      with his breakfast.\
\
      June went out early, and wandered restlessly about in the heat.\
      Her little light figure that lately had moved so languidly about\
      its business, was all on fire. She bought herself some flowers.\
      She wanted\'97she meant to look her best. _He_ would be there! She\
      knew well enough that he had a card. She would show him that she\
      did not care. But deep down in her heart she resolved that\
      evening to win him back. She came in flushed, and talked brightly\
      all lunch; old Jolyon was there, and he was deceived.\
\
      In the afternoon she was overtaken by a desperate fit of sobbing.\
      She strangled the noise against the pillows of her bed, but when\
      at last it ceased she saw in the glass a swollen face with\
      reddened eyes, and violet circles round them. She stayed in the\
      darkened room till dinner time.\
\
      All through that silent meal the struggle went on within her.\
\
      She looked so shadowy and exhausted that old Jolyon told \'93Sankey\'94\
      to countermand the carriage, he would not have her going out....\
      She was to go to bed! She made no resistance. She went up to her\
      room, and sat in the dark. At ten o\'92clock she rang for her maid.\
\
      \'93Bring some hot water, and go down and tell Mr. Forsyte that I\
      feel perfectly rested. Say that if he\'92s too tired I can go to the\
      dance by myself.\'94\
\
      The maid looked askance, and June turned on her imperiously.\
      \'93Go,\'94 she said, \'93bring the hot water at once!\'94\
\
      Her ball-dress still lay on the sofa, and with a sort of fierce\
      care she arrayed herself, took the flowers in her hand, and went\
      down, her small face carried high under its burden of hair. She\
      could hear old Jolyon in his room as she passed.\
\
      Bewildered and vexed, he was dressing. It was past ten, they\
      would not get there till eleven; the girl was mad. But he dared\
      not cross her\'97the expression of her face at dinner haunted him.\
\
      With great ebony brushes he smoothed his hair till it shone like\
      silver under the light; then he, too, came out on the gloomy\
      staircase.\
\
      June met him below, and, without a word, they went to the\
      carriage.\
\
      When, after that drive which seemed to last for ever, she entered\
      Roger\'92s drawing-room, she disguised under a mask of resolution a\
      very torment of nervousness and emotion. The feeling of shame at\
      what might be called \'93running after him\'94 was smothered by the\
      dread that he might not be there, that she might not see him\
      after all, and by that dogged resolve\'97somehow, she did not know\
      how\'97to win him back.\
\
      The sight of the ballroom, with its gleaming floor, gave her a\
      feeling of joy, of triumph, for she loved dancing, and when\
      dancing she floated, so light was she, like a strenuous, eager\
      little spirit. He would surely ask her to dance, and if he danced\
      with her it would all be as it was before. She looked about her\
      eagerly.\
\
      The sight of Bosinney coming with Irene from the conservatory,\
      with that strange look of utter absorption on his face, struck\
      her too suddenly. They had not seen\'97no one should see\'97her\
      distress, not even her grandfather.\
\
      She put her hand on Jolyon\'92s arm, and said very low:\
\
      \'93I must go home, Gran; I feel ill.\'94\
\
      He hurried her away, grumbling to himself that he had known how\
      it would be.\
\
      To her he said nothing; only when they were once more in the\
      carriage, which by some fortunate chance had lingered near the\
      door, he asked her: \'93What is it, my darling?\'94\
\
      Feeling her whole slender body shaken by sobs, he was terribly\
      alarmed. She must have Blank to-morrow. He would insist upon it.\
      He could not have her like this.... There, there!\
\
      June mastered her sobs, and squeezing his hand feverishly, she\
      lay back in her corner, her face muffled in a shawl.\
\
      He could only see her eyes, fixed and staring in the dark, but he\
      did not cease to stroke her hand with his thin fingers.\
\
\
      CHAPTER IX EVENING AT RICHMOND\
\
      Other eyes besides the eyes of June and of Soames had seen \'93those\
      two\'94 (as Euphemia had already begun to call them) coming from the\
      conservatory; other eyes had noticed the look on Bosinney\'92s face.\
\
      There are moments when Nature reveals the passion hidden beneath\
      the careless calm of her ordinary moods\'97violent spring flashing\
      white on almond-blossom through the purple clouds; a snowy,\
      moonlit peak, with its single star, soaring up to the passionate\
      blue; or against the flames of sunset, an old yew-tree standing\
      dark guardian of some fiery secret.\
\
      There are moments, too, when in a picture-gallery, a work, noted\
      by the casual spectator as \'93* * *Titian\'97remarkably fine,\'94 breaks\
      through the defences of some Forsyte better lunched perhaps than\
      his fellows, and holds him spellbound in a kind of ecstasy. There\
      are things, he feels\'97there are things here which\'97well, which are\
      things. Something unreasoning, unreasonable, is upon him; when he\
      tries to define it with the precision of a practical man, it\
      eludes him, slips away, as the glow of the wine he has drunk is\
      slipping away, leaving him cross, and conscious of his liver. He\
      feels that he has been extravagant, prodigal of something; virtue\
      has gone out of him. He did not desire this glimpse of what lay\
      under the three stars of his catalogue. God forbid that he should\
      know anything about the forces of Nature! God forbid that he\
      should admit for a moment that there are such things! Once admit\
      that, and where was he? One paid a shilling for entrance, and\
      another for the programme.\
\
      The look which June had seen, which other Forsytes had seen, was\
      like the sudden flashing of a candle through a hole in some\
      imaginary canvas, behind which it was being moved\'97the sudden\
      flaming-out of a vague, erratic glow, shadowy and enticing. It\
      brought home to onlookers the consciousness that dangerous forces\
      were at work. For a moment they noticed it with pleasure, with\
      interest, then felt they must not notice it at all.\
\
      It supplied, however, the reason of Jun\'92s coming so late and\
      disappearing again without dancing, without even shaking hands\
      with her lover. She was ill, it was said, and no wonder.\
\
      But here they looked at each other guiltily. They had no desire\
      to spread scandal, no desire to be ill-natured. Who would have?\
      And to outsiders no word was breathed, unwritten law keeping them\
      silent.\
\
      Then came the news that June had gone to the seaside with old\
      Jolyon.\
\
      He had carried her off to Broadstairs, for which place there was\
      just then a feeling, Yarmouth having lost caste, in spite of\
      Nicholas, and no Forsyte going to the sea without intending to\
      have an air for his money such as would render him bilious in a\
      week. That fatally aristocratic tendency of the first Forsyte to\
      drink Madeira had left his descendants undoubtedly accessible.\
\
      So June went to the sea. The family awaited developments; there\
      was nothing else to do.\
\
      But how far\'97how far had \'93those two\'94 gone? How far were they going\
      to go? Could they really be going at all? Nothing could surely\
      come of it, for neither of them had any money. At the most a\
      flirtation, ending, as all such attachments should, at the proper\
      time.\
\
      Soames\'92s sister, Winifred Dartie, who had imbibed with the\
      breezes of Mayfair\'97she lived in Green Street\'97more fashionable\
      principles in regard to matrimonial behaviour than were current,\
      for instance, in Ladbroke Grove, laughed at the idea of there\
      being anything in it. The \'93little thing\'94\'97Irene was taller than\
      herself, and it was real testimony to the solid worth of a\
      Forsyte that she should always thus be a \'93little thing\'94\'97the\
      little thing was bored. Why shouldn\'92t she amuse herself? Soames\
      was rather tiring; and as to Mr. Bosinney\'97only that buffoon\
      George would have called him the Buccaneer\'97she maintained that he\
      was very _chic_.\
\
      This dictum\'97that Bosinney was _chic_\'97caused quite a sensation. It\
      failed to convince. That he was \'93good-looking in a way\'94 they were\
      prepared to admit, but that anyone could call a man with his\
      pronounced cheekbones, curious eyes, and soft felt hats _chic_\
      was only another instance of Winifred\'92s extravagant way of\
      running after something new.\
\
      It was that famous summer when extravagance was fashionable, when\
      the very earth was extravagant, chestnut-trees spread with\
      blossom, and flowers drenched in perfume, as they had never been\
      before; when roses blew in every garden; and for the swarming\
      stars the nights had hardly space; when every day and all day\
      long the sun, in full armour, swung his brazen shield above the\
      Park, and people did strange things, lunching and dining in the\
      open air. Unprecedented was the tale of cabs and carriages that\
      streamed across the bridges of the shining river, bearing the\
      upper-middle class in thousands to the green glories of Bushey,\
      Richmond, Kew, and Hampton Court. Almost every family with any\
      pretensions to be of the carriage-class paid one visit that year\
      to the horse-chestnuts at Bushey, or took one drive amongst the\
      Spanish chestnuts of Richmond Park. Bowling smoothly, if dustily,\
      along, in a cloud of their own creation, they would stare\
      fashionably at the antlered heads which the great slow deer\
      raised out of a forest of bracken that promised to autumn lovers\
      such cover as was never seen before. And now and again, as the\
      amorous perfume of chestnut flowers and of fern was drifted too\
      near, one would say to the other: \'93My dear! What a peculiar\
      scent!\'94\
\
      And the lime-flowers that year were of rare prime, near\
      honey-coloured. At the corners of London squares they gave out,\
      as the sun went down, a perfume sweeter than the honey bees had\
      taken\'97a perfume that stirred a yearning unnamable in the hearts\
      of Forsytes and their peers, taking the cool after dinner in the\
      precincts of those gardens to which they alone had keys.\
\
      And that yearning made them linger amidst the dim shapes of\
      flower-beds in the failing daylight, made them turn, and turn,\
      and turn again, as though lovers were waiting for them\'97waiting\
      for the last light to die away under the shadow of the branches.\
\
      Some vague sympathy evoked by the scent of the limes, some\
      sisterly desire to see for herself, some idea of demonstrating\
      the soundness of her dictum that there was \'93nothing in it\'94; or\
      merely the craving to drive down to Richmond, irresistible that\
      summer, moved the mother of the little Darties (of little\
      Publius, of Imogen, Maud, and Benedict) to write the following\
      note to her sister-in-law:\
\
      \'93_June_ 30.\
\
      \'93DEAR IRENE,\
          \'93I hear that Soames is going to Henley tomorrow for the\
          night. I thought it would be great fun if we made up a little\
          party and drove down to, Richmond. Will you ask Mr. Bosinney,\
          and I will get young Flippard.\
          \'93Emily (they called their mother Emily\'97it was so chic) will\
          lend us the carriage. I will call for you and your young man\
          at seven o\'92clock.\
\
      \'93Your affectionate sister,\
      \'93WINIFRED DARTIE.\
\
      \'93Montague believes the dinner at the Crown and Sceptre to be\
      quite eatable.\'94\
\
      Montague was Dartie\'92s second and better known name\'97his first\
      being Moses; for he was nothing if not a man of the world.\
\
      Her plan met with more opposition from Providence than so\
      benevolent a scheme deserved. In the first place young Flippard\
      wrote:\
\
      \'93DEAR MRS. DARTIE,\
      \'93Awfully sorry. Engaged two deep.\
\
      \'93Yours,\
      \'93AUGUSTUS FLIPPARD.\'94\
\
      It was late to send into the by-ways and hedges to remedy this\
      misfortune. With the promptitude and conduct of a mother,\
      Winifred fell back on her husband. She had, indeed, the decided\
      but tolerant temperament that goes with a good deal of profile,\
      fair hair, and greenish eyes. She was seldom or never at a loss;\
      or if at a loss, was always able to convert it into a gain.\
\
      Dartie, too, was in good feather. Erotic had failed to win the\
      Lancashire Cup. Indeed, that celebrated animal, owned as he was\
      by a pillar of the turf, who had secretly laid many thousands\
      against him, had not even started. The forty-eight hours that\
      followed his scratching were among the darkest in Dartie\'92s life.\
\
      Visions of James haunted him day and night. Black thoughts about\
      Soames mingled with the faintest hopes. On the Friday night he\
      got drunk, so greatly was he affected. But on Saturday morning\
      the true Stock Exchange instinct triumphed within him. Owing some\
      hundreds, which by no possibility could he pay, he went into town\
      and put them all on Concertina for the Saltown Borough Handicap.\
\
      As he said to Major Scrotton, with whom he lunched at the Iseeum:\
      \'93That little Jew boy, Nathans, had given him the tip. He didn\'92t\
      care a cursh. He wash in\'97a mucker. If it didn\'92t come up\'97well\
      then, damme, the old man would have to pay!\'94\
\
      A bottle of Pol Roger to his own cheek had given him a new\
      contempt for James.\
\
      It came up. Concertina was squeezed home by her neck\'97a terrible\
      squeak! But, as Dartie said: There was nothing like pluck!\
\
      He was by no means averse to the expedition to Richmond. He would\
      \'93stand\'94 it himself! He cherished an admiration for Irene, and\
      wished to be on more playful terms with her.\
\
      At half-past five the Park Lane footman came round to say: Mrs.\
      Forsyte was very sorry, but one of the horses was coughing!\
\
      Undaunted by this further blow, Winifred at once despatched\
      little Publius (now aged seven) with the nursery governess to\
      Montpellier Square.\
\
      They would go down in hansoms and meet at the Crown and Sceptre\
      at 7.45.\
\
      Dartie, on being told, was pleased enough. It was better than\
      going down with your back to the horses! He had no objection to\
      driving down with Irene. He supposed they would pick up the\
      others at Montpellier Square, and swop hansoms there?\
\
      Informed that the meet was at the Crown and Sceptre, and that he\
      would have to drive with his wife, he turned sulky, and said it\
      was d\'97-d slow!\
\
      At seven o\'92clock they started, Dartie offering to bet the driver\
      half-a-crown he didn\'92t do it in the three-quarters of an hour.\
\
      Twice only did husband and wife exchange remarks on the way.\
\
      Dartie said: \'93It\'92ll put Master Soames\'92s nose out of joint to hear\
      his wife\'92s been drivin\'92 in a hansom with Master Bosinney!\'94\
\
      Winifred replied: \'93Don\'92t talk such nonsense, Monty!\'94\
\
      \'93Nonsense!\'94 repeated Dartie. \'93You don\'92t know women, my fine\
      lady!\'94\
\
      On the other occasion he merely asked: \'93How am I looking? A bit\
      puffy about the gills? That fizz old George is so fond of is a\
      windy wine!\'94\
\
      He had been lunching with George Forsyte at the Haversnake.\
\
      Bosinney and Irene had arrived before them. They were standing in\
      one of the long French windows overlooking the river.\
\
      Windows that summer were open all day long, and all night too,\
      and day and night the scents of flowers and trees came in, the\
      hot scent of parching grass, and the cool scent of the heavy\
      dews.\
\
      To the eye of the observant Dartie his two guests did not appear\
      to be making much running, standing there close together, without\
      a word. Bosinney was a hungry-looking creature\'97not much go about\
      _him!_\
\
      He left them to Winifred, however, and busied himself to order\
      the dinner.\
\
      A Forsyte will require good, if not delicate feeding, but a\
      Dartie will tax the resources of a Crown and Sceptre. Living as\
      he does, from hand to mouth, nothing is too good for him to eat;\
      and he will eat it. His drink, too, will need to be carefully\
      provided; there is much drink in this country \'93not good enough\'94\
      for a Dartie; he will have the best. Paying for things\
      vicariously, there is no reason why he should stint himself. To\
      stint yourself is the mark of a fool, not of a Dartie.\
\
      The best of everything! No sounder principle on which a man can\
      base his life, whose father-in-law has a very considerable\
      income, and a partiality for his grandchildren.\
\
      With his not unable eye Dartie had spotted this weakness in James\
      the very first year after little Publius\'92s arrival (an error); he\
      had profited by his perspicacity. Four little Darties were now a\
      sort of perpetual insurance.\
\
      The feature of the feast was unquestionably the red mullet. This\
      delectable fish, brought from a considerable distance in a state\
      of almost perfect preservation, was first fried, then boned, then\
      served in ice, with Madeira punch in place of sauce, according to\
      a recipe known to a few men of the world.\
\
      Nothing else calls for remark except the payment of the bill by\
      Dartie.\
\
      He had made himself extremely agreeable throughout the meal; his\
      bold, admiring stare seldom abandoning Irene\'92s face and figure.\
      As he was obliged to confess to himself, he got no change out of\
      her\'97she was cool enough, as cool as her shoulders looked under\
      their veil of creamy lace. He expected to have caught her out in\
      some little game with Bosinney; but not a bit of it, she kept up\
      her end remarkably well. As for that architect chap, he was as\
      glum as a bear with a sore head\'97Winifred could barely get a word\
      out of him; he ate nothing, but he certainly took his liquor, and\
      his face kept getting whiter, and his eyes looked queer.\
\
      It was all very amusing.\
\
      For Dartie himself was in capital form, and talked freely, with a\
      certain poignancy, being no fool. He told two or three stories\
      verging on the improper, a concession to the company, for his\
      stories were not used to verging. He proposed Irene\'92s health in a\
      mock speech. Nobody drank it, and Winifred said: \'93Don\'92t be such a\
      clown, Monty!\'94\
\
      At her suggestion they went after dinner to the public terrace\
      overlooking the river.\
\
      \'93I should like to see the common people making love,\'94 she said,\
      \'93it\'92s such fun!\'94\
\
      There were numbers of them walking in the cool, after the day\'92s\
      heat, and the air was alive with the sound of voices, coarse and\
      loud, or soft as though murmuring secrets.\
\
      It was not long before Winifred\'92s better sense\'97she was the only\
      Forsyte present\'97secured them an empty bench. They sat down in a\
      row. A heavy tree spread a thick canopy above their heads, and\
      the haze darkened slowly over the river.\
\
      Dartie sat at the end, next to him Irene, then Bosinney, then\
      Winifred. There was hardly room for four, and the man of the\
      world could feel Irene\'92s arm crushed against his own; he knew\
      that she could not withdraw it without seeming rude, and this\
      amused him; he devised every now and again a movement that would\
      bring her closer still. He thought: \'93That Buccaneer Johnny shan\'92t\
      have it all to himself! It\'92s a pretty tight fit, certainly!\'94\
\
      From far down below on the dark river came drifting the tinkle of\
      a mandoline, and voices singing the old round:\
\
      \'93A boat, a boat, unto the ferry,\
      For we\'92ll go over and be merry;\
      And laugh, and quaff, and drink brown sherry!\'94\
\
      And suddenly the moon appeared, young and tender, floating up on\
      her back from behind a tree; and as though she had breathed, the\
      air was cooler, but down that cooler air came always the warm\
      odour of the limes.\
\
      Over his cigar Dartie peered round at Bosinney, who was sitting\
      with his arms crossed, staring straight in front of him, and on\
      his face the look of a man being tortured.\
\
      And Dartie shot a glance at the face between, so veiled by the\
      overhanging shadow that it was but like a darker piece of the\
      darkness shaped and breathed on; soft, mysterious, enticing.\
\
      A hush had fallen on the noisy terrace, as if all the strollers\
      were thinking secrets too precious to be spoken.\
\
      And Dartie thought: \'93Women!\'94\
\
      The glow died above the river, the singing ceased; the young moon\
      hid behind a tree, and all was dark. He pressed himself against\
      Irene.\
\
      He was not alarmed at the shuddering that ran through the limbs\
      he touched, or at the troubled, scornful look of her eyes. He\
      felt her trying to draw herself away, and smiled.\
\
      It must be confessed that the man of the world had drunk quite as\
      much as was good for him.\
\
      With thick lips parted under his well-curled moustaches, and his\
      bold eyes aslant upon her, he had the malicious look of a satyr.\
\
      Along the pathway of sky between the hedges of the tree tops the\
      stars clustered forth; like mortals beneath, they seemed to shift\
      and swarm and whisper. Then on the terrace the buzz broke out\
      once more, and Dartie thought: \'93Ah! he\'92s a poor, hungry-looking\
      devil, that Bosinney!\'94 and again he pressed himself against\
      Irene.\
\
      The movement deserved a better success. She rose, and they all\
      followed her.\
\
      The man of the world was more than ever determined to see what\
      she was made of. Along the terrace he kept close at her elbow. He\
      had within him much good wine. There was the long drive home, the\
      long drive and the warm dark and the pleasant closeness of the\
      hansom cab\'97with its insulation from the world devised by some\
      great and good man. That hungry architect chap might drive with\
      his wife\'97he wished him joy of her! And, conscious that his voice\
      was not too steady, he was careful not to speak; but a smile had\
      become fixed on his thick lips.\
\
      They strolled along toward the cabs awaiting them at the farther\
      end. His plan had the merit of all great plans, an almost brutal\
      simplicity\'97 he would merely keep at her elbow till she got in,\
      and get in quickly after her.\
\
      But when Irene reached the cab she did not get in; she slipped,\
      instead, to the horse\'92s head. Dartie was not at the moment\
      sufficiently master of his legs to follow. She stood stroking the\
      horse\'92s nose, and, to his annoyance, Bosinney was at her side\
      first. She turned and spoke to him rapidly, in a low voice; the\
      words \'93That man\'94 reached Dartie. He stood stubbornly by the cab\
      step, waiting for her to come back. He knew a trick worth two of\
      that!\
\
      Here, in the lamp-light, his figure (no more than medium height),\
      well squared in its white evening waistcoat, his light overcoat\
      flung over his arm, a pink flower in his button-hole, and on his\
      dark face that look of confident, good-humoured insolence, he was\
      at his best\'97a thorough man of the world.\
\
      Winifred was already in her cab. Dartie reflected that Bosinney\
      would have a poorish time in that cab if he didn\'92t look sharp!\
      Suddenly he received a push which nearly overturned him in the\
      road. Bosinney\'92s voice hissed in his ear: \'93I am taking Irene\
      back; do you understand?\'94 He saw a face white with passion, and\
      eyes that glared at him like a wild cat\'92s.\
\
      \'93Eh?\'94 he stammered. \'93What? Not a bit. You take my wife!\'94\
\
      \'93Get away!\'94 hissed Bosinney\'97\'93or I\'92ll throw you into the road!\'94\
\
      Dartie recoiled; he saw as plainly as possible that the fellow\
      meant it. In the space he made Irene had slipped by, her dress\
      brushed his legs. Bosinney stepped in after her.\
\
      \'93Go on!\'94 he heard the Buccaneer cry. The cabman flicked his\
      horse. It sprang forward.\
\
      Dartie stood for a moment dumbfounded; then, dashing at the cab\
      where his wife sat, he scrambled in.\
\
      \'93Drive on!\'94 he shouted to the driver, \'93and don\'92t you lose sight\
      of that fellow in front!\'94\
\
      Seated by his wife\'92s side, he burst into imprecations. Calming\
      himself at last with a supreme effort, he added: \'93A pretty mess\
      you\'92ve made of it, to let the Buccaneer drive home with her; why\
      on earth couldn\'92t you keep hold of him? He\'92s mad with love; any\
      fool can see that!\'94\
\
      He drowned Winifred\'92s rejoinder with fresh calls to the Almighty;\
      nor was it until they reached Barnes that he ceased a Jeremiad,\
      in the course of which he had abused her, her father, her\
      brother, Irene, Bosinney, the name of Forsyte, his own children,\
      and cursed the day when he had ever married.\
\
      Winifred, a woman of strong character, let him have his say, at\
      the end of which he lapsed into sulky silence. His angry eyes\
      never deserted the back of that cab, which, like a lost chance,\
      haunted the darkness in front of him.\
\
      Fortunately he could not hear Bosinney\'92s passionate pleading\'97that\
      pleading which the man of the world\'92s conduct had let loose like\
      a flood; he could not see Irene shivering, as though some garment\
      had been torn from her, nor her eyes, black and mournful, like\
      the eyes of a beaten child. He could not hear Bosinney\
      entreating, entreating, always entreating; could not hear her\
      sudden, soft weeping, nor see that poor, hungry-looking devil,\
      awed and trembling, humbly touching her hand.\
\
      In Montpellier Square their cabman, following his instructions to\
      the letter, faithfully drew up behind the cab in front. The\
      Darties saw Bosinney spring out, and Irene follow, and hasten up\
      the steps with bent head. She evidently had her key in her hand,\
      for she disappeared at once. It was impossible to tell whether\
      she had turned to speak to Bosinney.\
\
      The latter came walking past their cab; both husband and wife had\
      an admirable view of his face in the light of a street lamp. It\
      was working with violent emotion.\
\
      \'93Good-night, Mr. Bosinney!\'94 called Winifred.\
\
      Bosinney started, clawed off his hat, and hurried on. He had\
      obviously forgotten their existence.\
\
      \'93There!\'94 said Dartie, \'93did you see the beast\'92s face? What did I\
      say? Fine games!\'94 He improved the occasion.\
\
      There had so clearly been a crisis in the cab that Winifred was\
      unable to defend her theory.\
\
      She said: \'93I shall say nothing about it. I don\'92t see any use in\
      making a fuss!\'94\
\
      With that view Dartie at once concurred; looking upon James as a\
      private preserve, he disapproved of his being disturbed by the\
      troubles of others.\
\
      \'93Quite right,\'94 he said; \'93let Soames look after himself. He\'92s\
      jolly well able to!\'94\
\
      Thus speaking, the Darties entered their habitat in Green Street,\
      the rent of which was paid by James, and sought a well-earned\
      rest. The hour was midnight, and no Forsytes remained abroad in\
      the streets to spy out Bosinney\'92s wanderings; to see him return\
      and stand against the rails of the Square garden, back from the\
      glow of the street lamp; to see him stand there in the shadow of\
      trees, watching the house where in the dark was hidden she whom\
      he would have given the world to see for a single minute\'97she who\
      was now to him the breath of the lime-trees, the meaning of the\
      light and the darkness, the very beating of his own heart.\
\
\
      CHAPTER X DIAGNOSIS OF A FORSYTE\
\
      It is in the nature of a Forsyte to be ignorant that he is a\
      Forsyte; but young Jolyon was well aware of being one. He had not\
      known it till after the decisive step which had made him an\
      outcast; since then the knowledge had been with him continually.\
      He felt it throughout his alliance, throughout all his dealings\
      with his second wife, who was emphatically not a Forsyte.\
\
      He knew that if he had not possessed in great measure the eye for\
      what he wanted, the tenacity to hold on to it, the sense of the\
      folly of wasting that for which he had given so big a price\'97in\
      other words, the \'93sense of property\'94 he could never have retained\
      her (perhaps never would have desired to retain her) with him\
      through all the financial troubles, slights, and misconstructions\
      of those fifteen years; never have induced her to marry him on\
      the death of his first wife; never have lived it all through, and\
      come up, as it were, thin, but smiling.\
\
      He was one of those men who, seated cross-legged like miniature\
      Chinese idols in the cages of their own hearts, are ever smiling\
      at themselves a doubting smile. Not that this smile, so intimate\
      and eternal, interfered with his actions, which, like his chin\
      and his temperament, were quite a peculiar blend of softness and\
      determination.\
\
      He was conscious, too, of being a Forsyte in his work, that\
      painting of water-colours to which he devoted so much energy,\
      always with an eye on himself, as though he could not take so\
      unpractical a pursuit quite seriously, and always with a certain\
      queer uneasiness that he did not make more money at it.\
\
      It was, then, this consciousness of what it meant to be a\
      Forsyte, that made him receive the following letter from old\
      Jolyon, with a mixture of sympathy and disgust:\
\
      \'93SHELDRAKE HOUSE,\
      \'93BROADSTAIRS,\
      \'93_July_ 1.\
\
      \'93MY DEAR JO,\'94\
          (The Dad\'92s handwriting had altered very little in the thirty\
          odd years that he remembered it.)\
          \'93We have been here now a fortnight, and have had good weather\
          on the whole. The air is bracing, but my liver is out of\
          order, and I shall be glad enough to get back to town. I\
          cannot say much for June, her health and spirits are very\
          indifferent, and I don\'92t see what is to come of it. She says\
          nothing, but it is clear that she is harping on this\
          engagement, which is an engagement and no engagement,\
          and\'97goodness knows what. I have grave doubts whether she\
          ought to be allowed to return to London in the present state\
          of affairs, but she is so self-willed that she might take it\
          into her head to come up at any moment. The fact is someone\
          ought to speak to Bosinney and ascertain what he means. I\'92m\
          afraid of this myself, for I should certainly rap him over\
          the knuckles, but I thought that you, knowing him at the\
          Club, might put in a word, and get to ascertain what the\
          fellow is about. You will of course in no way commit June. I\
          shall be glad to hear from you in the course of a few days\
          whether you have succeeded in gaining any information. The\
          situation is very distressing to me, I worry about it at\
          night. With my love to Jolly and Holly.\
\
      \'93I am,\
      \'93Your affect. father,\
      \'93JOLYON FORSYTE.\'94\
\
      Young Jolyon pondered this letter so long and seriously that his\
      wife noticed his preoccupation, and asked him what was the\
      matter. He replied: \'93Nothing.\'94\
\
      It was a fixed principle with him never to allude to June. She\
      might take alarm, he did not know what she might think; he\
      hastened, therefore, to banish from his manner all traces of\
      absorption, but in this he was about as successful as his father\
      would have been, for he had inherited all old Jolyon\'92s\
      transparency in matters of domestic finesse; and young Mrs.\
      Jolyon, busying herself over the affairs of the house, went about\
      with tightened lips, stealing at him unfathomable looks.\
\
      He started for the Club in the afternoon with the letter in his\
      pocket, and without having made up his mind.\
\
      To sound a man as to \'93his intentions\'94 was peculiarly unpleasant\
      to him; nor did his own anomalous position diminish this\
      unpleasantness. It was so like his family, so like all the people\
      they knew and mixed with, to enforce what they called their\
      rights over a man, to bring him up to the mark; so like them to\
      carry their business principles into their private relations.\
\
      And how that phrase in the letter\'97\'93You will, of course, in no way\
      commit June\'94\'97gave the whole thing away.\
\
      Yet the letter, with the personal grievance, the concern for\
      June, the \'93rap over the knuckles,\'94 was all so natural. No wonder\
      his father wanted to know what Bosinney meant, no wonder he was\
      angry.\
\
      It was difficult to refuse! But why give the thing to him to do?\
      That was surely quite unbecoming; but so long as a Forsyte got\
      what he was after, he was not too particular about the means,\
      provided appearances were saved.\
\
      How should he set about it, or how refuse? Both seemed\
      impossible. So, young Jolyon!\
\
      He arrived at the Club at three o\'92clock, and the first person he\
      saw was Bosinney himself, seated in a corner, staring out of the\
      window.\
\
      Young Jolyon sat down not far off, and began nervously to\
      reconsider his position. He looked covertly at Bosinney sitting\
      there unconscious. He did not know him very well, and studied him\
      attentively for perhaps the first time; an unusual looking man,\
      unlike in dress, face, and manner to most of the other members of\
      the Club\'97young Jolyon himself, however different he had become in\
      mood and temper, had always retained the neat reticence of\
      Forsyte appearance. He alone among Forsytes was ignorant of\
      Bosinney\'92s nickname. The man was unusual, not eccentric, but\
      unusual; he looked worn, too, haggard, hollow in the cheeks\
      beneath those broad, high cheekbones, though without any\
      appearance of ill-health, for he was strongly built, with curly\
      hair that seemed to show all the vitality of a fine constitution.\
\
      Something in his face and attitude touched young Jolyon. He knew\
      what suffering was like, and this man looked as if he were\
      suffering.\
\
      He got up and touched his arm.\
\
      Bosinney started, but exhibited no sign of embarrassment on\
      seeing who it was.\
\
      Young Jolyon sat down.\
\
      \'93I haven\'92t seen you for a long time,\'94 he said. \'93How are you\
      getting on with my cousin\'92s house?\'94\
\
      \'93It\'92ll be finished in about a week.\'94\
\
      \'93I congratulate you!\'94\
\
      \'93Thanks\'97I don\'92t know that it\'92s much of a subject for\
      congratulation.\'94\
\
      \'93No?\'94 queried young Jolyon; \'93I should have thought you\'92d be glad\
      to get a long job like that off your hands; but I suppose you\
      feel it much as I do when I part with a picture\'97a sort of child?\'94\
\
      He looked kindly at Bosinney.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said the latter more cordially, \'93it goes out from you and\
      there\'92s an end of it. I didn\'92t know you painted.\'94\
\
      \'93Only water-colours; I can\'92t say I believe in my work.\'94\
\
      \'93Don\'92t believe in it? There\'97how can you do it? Work\'92s no use\
      unless you believe in it!\'94\
\
      \'93Good,\'94 said young Jolyon; \'93it\'92s exactly what I\'92ve always said.\
      By-the-bye, have you noticed that whenever one says \'91Good,\'92 one\
      always adds \'91it\'92s exactly what I\'92ve always said\'92. But if you ask\
      me how I do it, I answer, because I\'92m a Forsyte.\'94\
\
      \'93A Forsyte! I never thought of you as one!\'94\
\
      \'93A Forsyte,\'94 replied young Jolyon, \'93is not an uncommon animal.\
      There are hundreds among the members of this Club. Hundreds out\
      there in the streets; you meet them wherever you go!\'94\
\
      \'93And how do you tell them, may I ask?\'94 said Bosinney.\
\
      \'93By their sense of property. A Forsyte takes a practical\'97one\
      might say a commonsense\'97view of things, and a practical view of\
      things is based fundamentally on a sense of property. A Forsyte,\
      you will notice, never gives himself away.\'94\
\
      \'93Joking?\'94\
\
      Young Jolyon\'92s eye twinkled.\
\
      \'93Not much. As a Forsyte myself, I have no business to talk. But\
      I\'92m a kind of thoroughbred mongrel; now, there\'92s no mistaking\
      you: You\'92re as different from me as I am from my Uncle James, who\
      is the perfect specimen of a Forsyte. His sense of property is\
      extreme, while you have practically none. Without me in between,\
      you would seem like a different species. I\'92m the missing link. We\
      are, of course, all of us the slaves of property, and I admit\
      that it\'92s a question of degree, but what I call a \'91Forsyte\'92 is a\
      man who is decidedly more than less a slave of property. He knows\
      a good thing, he knows a safe thing, and his grip on property\'97it\
      doesn\'92t matter whether it be wives, houses, money, or\
      reputation\'97is his hall-mark.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 murmured Bosinney. \'93You should patent the word.\'94\
\
      \'93I should like,\'94 said young Jolyon, \'93to lecture on it:\
\
      \'93Properties and quality of a Forsyte: This little animal,\
      disturbed by the ridicule of his own sort, is unaffected in his\
      motions by the laughter of strange creatures (you or I).\
      Hereditarily disposed to myopia, he recognises only the persons\
      of his own species, amongst which he passes an existence of\
      competitive tranquillity.\'94\
\
      \'93You talk of them,\'94 said Bosinney, \'93as if they were half\
      England.\'94\
\
      \'93They are,\'94 repeated young Jolyon, \'93half England, and the better\
      half, too, the safe half, the three per cent. half, the half that\
      counts. It\'92s their wealth and security that makes everything\
      possible; makes your art possible, makes literature, science,\
      even religion, possible. Without Forsytes, who believe in none of\
      these things, and habitats but turn them all to use, where should\
      we be? My dear sir, the Forsytes are the middlemen, the\
      commercials, the pillars of society, the cornerstones of\
      convention; everything that is admirable!\'94\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know whether I catch your drift,\'94 said Bosinney, \'93but I\
      fancy there are plenty of Forsytes, as you call them, in my\
      profession.\'94\
\
      \'93Certainly,\'94 replied young Jolyon. \'93The great majority of\
      architects, painters, or writers have no principles, like any\
      other Forsytes. Art, literature, religion, survive by virtue of\
      the few cranks who really believe in such things, and the many\
      Forsytes who make a commercial use of them. At a low estimate,\
      three-fourths of our Royal Academicians are Forsytes,\
      seven-eighths of our novelists, a large proportion of the press.\
      Of science I can\'92t speak; they are magnificently represented in\
      religion; in the House of Commons perhaps more numerous than\
      anywhere; the aristocracy speaks for itself. But I\'92m not\
      laughing. It is dangerous to go against the majority and what a\
      majority!\'94 He fixed his eyes on Bosinney: \'93It\'92s dangerous to let\
      anything carry you away\'97a house, a picture, a\'97woman!\'94\
\
      They looked at each other.\'97And, as though he had done that which\
      no Forsyte did\'97given himself away, young Jolyon drew into his\
      shell. Bosinney broke the silence.\
\
      \'93Why do you take your own people as the type?\'94 said he.\
\
      \'93My people,\'94 replied young Jolyon, \'93are not very extreme, and\
      they have their own private peculiarities, like every other\
      family, but they possess in a remarkable degree those two\
      qualities which are the real tests of a Forsyte\'97the power of\
      never being able to give yourself up to anything soul and body,\
      and the \'91sense of property\'92.\'94\
\
      Bosinney smiled: \'93How about the big one, for instance?\'94\
\
      \'93Do you mean Swithin?\'94 asked young Jolyon. \'93Ah! in Swithin\
      there\'92s something primeval still. The town and middle-class life\
      haven\'92t digested him yet. All the old centuries of farm work and\
      brute force have settled in him, and there they\'92ve stuck, for all\
      he\'92s so distinguished.\'94\
\
      Bosinney seemed to ponder. \'93Well, you\'92ve hit your cousin Soames\
      off to the life,\'94 he said suddenly. \'93_He\'92ll_ never blow his\
      brains out.\'94\
\
      Young Jolyon shot at him a penetrating glance.\
\
      \'93No,\'94 he said; \'93he won\'92t. That\'92s why he\'92s to be reckoned with.\
      Look out for their grip! It\'92s easy to laugh, but don\'92t mistake\
      me. It doesn\'92t do to despise a Forsyte; it doesn\'92t do to\
      disregard them!\'94\
\
      \'93Yet you\'92ve done it yourself!\'94\
\
      Young Jolyon acknowledged the hit by losing his smile.\
\
      \'93You forget,\'94 he said with a queer pride, \'93I can hold on, too\'97I\'92m\
      a Forsyte myself. We\'92re all in the path of great forces. The man\
      who leaves the shelter of the wall\'97well\'97you know what I mean. I\
      don\'92t,\'94 he ended very low, as though uttering a threat,\
      \'93recommend every man to-go-my-way. It depends.\'94\
\
      The colour rushed into Bosinney\'92s face, but soon receded, leaving\
      it sallow-brown as before. He gave a short laugh, that left his\
      lips fixed in a queer, fierce smile; his eyes mocked young\
      Jolyon.\
\
      \'93Thanks,\'94 he said. \'93It\'92s deuced kind of you. But you\'92re not the\
      only chaps that can hold on.\'94 He rose.\
\
      Young Jolyon looked after him as he walked away, and, resting his\
      head on his hand, sighed.\
\
      In the drowsy, almost empty room the only sounds were the rustle\
      of newspapers, the scraping of matches being struck. He stayed a\
      long time without moving, living over again those days when he,\
      too, had sat long hours watching the clock, waiting for the\
      minutes to pass\'97long hours full of the torments of uncertainty,\
      and of a fierce, sweet aching; and the slow, delicious agony of\
      that season came back to him with its old poignancy. The sight of\
      Bosinney, with his haggard face, and his restless eyes always\
      wandering to the clock, had roused in him a pity, with which was\
      mingled strange, irresistible envy.\
\
      He knew the signs so well. Whither was he going\'97to what sort of\
      fate? What kind of woman was it who was drawing him to her by\
      that magnetic force which no consideration of honour, no\
      principle, no interest could withstand; from which the only\
      escape was flight.\
\
      Flight! But why should Bosinney fly? A man fled when he was in\
      danger of destroying hearth and home, when there were children,\
      when he felt himself trampling down ideals, breaking something.\
      But here, so he had heard, it was all broken to his hand.\
\
      He himself had not fled, nor would he fly if it were all to come\
      over again. Yet he had gone further than Bosinney, had broken up\
      his own unhappy home, not someone else\'92s: And the old saying came\
      back to him: \'93A man\'92s fate lies in his own heart.\'94\
\
      In his own heart! The proof of the pudding was in the\
      eating\'97Bosinney had still to eat his pudding.\
\
      His thoughts passed to the woman, the woman whom he did not know,\
      but the outline of whose story he had heard.\
\
      An unhappy marriage! No ill-treatment\'97only that indefinable\
      malaise, that terrible blight which killed all sweetness under\
      Heaven; and so from day to day, from night to night, from week to\
      week, from year to year, till death should end it.\
\
      But young Jolyon, the bitterness of whose own feelings time had\
      assuaged, saw Soames\'92s side of the question too. Whence should a\
      man like his cousin, saturated with all the prejudices and\
      beliefs of his class, draw the insight or inspiration necessary\
      to break up this life? It was a question of imagination, of\
      projecting himself into the future beyond the unpleasant gossip,\
      sneers, and tattle that followed on such separations, beyond the\
      passing pangs that the lack of the sight of her would cause,\
      beyond the grave disapproval of the worthy. But few men, and\
      especially few men of Soames\'92s class, had imagination enough for\
      that. A deal of mortals in this world, and not enough imagination\
      to go round! And sweet Heaven, what a difference between theory\
      and practice; many a man, perhaps even Soames, held chivalrous\
      views on such matters, who when the shoe pinched found a\
      distinguishing factor that made of himself an exception.\
\
      Then, too, he distrusted his judgment. He had been through the\
      experience himself, had tasted to the dregs the bitterness of an\
      unhappy marriage, and how could he take the wide and\
      dispassionate view of those who had never been within sound of\
      the battle? His evidence was too first-hand\'97like the evidence on\
      military matters of a soldier who has been through much active\
      service, against that of civilians who have not suffered the\
      disadvantage of seeing things too close. Most people would\
      consider such a marriage as that of Soames and Irene quite fairly\
      successful; he had money, she had beauty; it was a case for\
      compromise. There was no reason why they should not jog along,\
      even if they hated each other. It would not matter if they went\
      their own ways a little so long as the decencies were\
      observed\'97the sanctity of the marriage tie, of the common home,\
      respected. Half the marriages of the upper classes were conducted\
      on these lines: Do not offend the susceptibilities of Society; do\
      not offend the susceptibilities of the Church. To avoid offending\
      these is worth the sacrifice of any private feelings. The\
      advantages of the stable home are visible, tangible, so many\
      pieces of property; there is no risk in the _statu quo_. To break\
      up a home is at the best a dangerous experiment, and selfish into\
      the bargain.\
\
      This was the case for the defence, and young Jolyon sighed.\
\
      \'93The core of it all,\'94 he thought, \'93is property, but there are\
      many people who would not like it put that way. To them it is\
      \'91the sanctity of the marriage tie\'92; but the sanctity of the\
      marriage tie is dependent on the sanctity of the family, and the\
      sanctity of the family is dependent on the sanctity of property.\
      And yet I imagine all these people are followers of One who never\
      owned anything. It is curious!\'94\
\
      And again young Jolyon sighed.\
\
      \'93Am I going on my way home to ask any poor devils I meet to share\
      my dinner, which will then be too little for myself, or, at all\
      events, for my wife, who is necessary to my health and happiness?\
      It may be that after all Soames does well to exercise his rights\
      and support by his practice the sacred principle of property\
      which benefits us all, with the exception of those who suffer by\
      the process.\'94\
\
      And so he left his chair, threaded his way through the maze of\
      seats, took his hat, and languidly up the hot streets crowded\
      with carriages, reeking with dusty odours, wended his way home.\
\
      Before reaching Wistaria Avenue he removed old Jolyon\'92s letter\
      from his pocket, and tearing it carefully into tiny pieces,\
      scattered them in the dust of the road.\
\
      He let himself in with his key, and called his wife\'92s name. But\
      she had gone out, taking Jolly and Holly, and the house was\
      empty; alone in the garden the dog Balthasar lay in the shade\
      snapping at flies.\
\
      Young Jolyon took his seat there, too, under the pear-tree that\
      bore no fruit.\
\
\
      CHAPTER XI BOSINNEY ON PAROLE\
\
      The day after the evening at Richmond Soames returned from Henley\
      by a morning train. Not constitutionally interested in amphibious\
      sports, his visit had been one of business rather than pleasure,\
      a client of some importance having asked him down.\
\
      He went straight to the City, but finding things slack, he left\
      at three o\'92clock, glad of this chance to get home quietly. Irene\
      did not expect him. Not that he had any desire to spy on her\
      actions, but there was no harm in thus unexpectedly surveying the\
      scene.\
\
      After changing to Park clothes he went into the drawing-room. She\
      was sitting idly in the corner of the sofa, her favourite seat;\
      and there were circles under her eyes, as though she had not\
      slept.\
\
      He asked: \'93How is it you\'92re in? Are you expecting somebody?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes\'97that is, not particularly.\'94\
\
      \'93Who?\'94\
\
      \'93Mr. Bosinney said he might come.\'94\
\
      \'93Bosinney. He ought to be at work.\'94\
\
      To this she made no answer.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Soames, \'93I want you to come out to the Stores with\
      me, and after that we\'92ll go to the Park.\'94\
\
      \'93I don\'92t want to go out; I have a headache.\'94\
\
      Soames replied: \'93If ever I want you to do anything, you\'92ve always\
      got a headache. It\'92ll do you good to come and sit under the\
      trees.\'94\
\
      She did not answer.\
\
      Soames was silent for some minutes; at last he said: \'93I don\'92t\
      know what your idea of a wife\'92s duty is. I never have known!\'94\
\
      He had not expected her to reply, but she did.\
\
      \'93I have tried to do what you want; it\'92s not my fault that I\
      haven\'92t been able to put my heart into it.\'94\
\
      \'93Whose fault is it, then?\'94 He watched her askance.\
\
      \'93Before we were married you promised to let me go if our marriage\
      was not a success. Is it a success?\'94\
\
      Soames frowned.\
\
      \'93Success,\'94 he stammered\'97\'93it would be a success if you behaved\
      yourself properly!\'94\
\
      \'93I have tried,\'94 said Irene. \'93Will you let me go?\'94\
\
      Soames turned away. Secretly alarmed, he took refuge in bluster.\
\
      \'93Let you go? You don\'92t know what you\'92re talking about. Let you\
      go? How can I let you go? We\'92re married, aren\'92t we? Then, what\
      are you talking about? For God\'92s sake, don\'92t let\'92s have any of\
      this sort of nonsense! Get your hat on, and come and sit in the\
      Park.\'94\
\
      \'93Then, you won\'92t let me go?\'94\
\
      He felt her eyes resting on him with a strange, touching look.\
\
      \'93Let you go!\'94 he said; \'93and what on earth would you do with\
      yourself if I did? You\'92ve got no money!\'94\
\
      \'93I could manage somehow.\'94\
\
      He took a swift turn up and down the room; then came and stood\
      before her.\
\
      \'93Understand,\'94 he said, \'93once and for all, I won\'92t have you say\
      this sort of thing. Go and get your hat on!\'94\
\
      She did not move.\
\
      \'93I suppose,\'94 said Soames, \'93you don\'92t want to miss Bosinney if he\
      comes!\'94\
\
      Irene got up slowly and left the room. She came down with her hat\
      on.\
\
      They went out.\
\
      In the Park, the motley hour of mid-afternoon, when foreigners\
      and other pathetic folk drive, thinking themselves to be in\
      fashion, had passed; the right, the proper, hour had come, was\
      nearly gone, before Soames and Irene seated themselves under the\
      Achilles statue.\
\
      It was some time since he had enjoyed her company in the Park.\
      That was one of the past delights of the first two seasons of his\
      married life, when to feel himself the possessor of this gracious\
      creature before all London had been his greatest, though secret,\
      pride. How many afternoons had he not sat beside her, extremely\
      neat, with light grey gloves and faint, supercilious smile,\
      nodding to acquaintances, and now and again removing his hat.\
\
      His light grey gloves were still on his hands, and on his lips\
      his smile sardonic, but where the feeling in his heart?\
\
      The seats were emptying fast, but still he kept her there, silent\
      and pale, as though to work out a secret punishment. Once or\
      twice he made some comment, and she bent her head, or answered\
      \'93Yes\'94 with a tired smile.\
\
      Along the rails a man was walking so fast that people stared\
      after him when he passed.\
\
      \'93Look at that ass!\'94 said Soames; \'93he must be mad to walk like\
      that in this heat!\'94\
\
      He turned; Irene had made a rapid movement.\
\
      \'93Hallo!\'94 he said: \'93it\'92s our friend the Buccaneer!\'94\
\
      And he sat still, with his sneering smile, conscious that Irene\
      was sitting still, and smiling too.\
\
      \'93Will she bow to him?\'94 he thought.\
\
      But she made no sign.\
\
      Bosinney reached the end of the rails, and came walking back\
      amongst the chairs, quartering his ground like a pointer. When he\
      saw them he stopped dead, and raised his hat.\
\
      The smile never left Soames\'92s face; he also took off his hat.\
\
      Bosinney came up, looking exhausted, like a man after hard\
      physical exercise; the sweat stood in drops on his brow, and\
      Soames\'92 smile seemed to say: \'93You\'92ve had a trying time, my\
      friend.... What are _you_ doing in the Park?\'94 he asked. \'93We\
      thought you despised such frivolity!\'94\
\
      Bosinney did not seem to hear; he made his answer to Irene: \'93I\'92ve\
      been round to your place; I hoped I should find you in.\'94\
\
      Somebody tapped Soames on the back, and spoke to him; and in the\
      exchange of those platitudes over his shoulder, he missed her\
      answer, and took a resolution.\
\
      \'93We\'92re just going in,\'94 he said to Bosinney; \'93you\'92d better come\
      back to dinner with us.\'94 Into that invitation he put a strange\
      bravado, a stranger pathos: \'93You, can\'92t deceive me,\'94 his look and\
      voice seemed saying, \'93but see\'97I trust you\'97I\'92m not afraid of you!\'94\
\
      They started back to Montpellier Square together, Irene between\
      them. In the crowded streets Soames went on in front. He did not\
      listen to their conversation; the strange resolution of\
      trustfulness he had taken seemed to animate even his secret\
      conduct. Like a gambler, he said to himself: \'93It\'92s a card I dare\
      not throw away\'97I must play it for what it\'92s worth. I have not too\
      many chances.\'94\
\
      He dressed slowly, heard her leave her room and go downstairs,\
      and, for full five minutes after, dawdled about in his\
      dressing-room. Then he went down, purposely shutting the door\
      loudly to show that he was coming. He found them standing by the\
      hearth, perhaps talking, perhaps not; he could not say.\
\
      He played his part out in the farce, the long evening through\'97his\
      manner to his guest more friendly than it had ever been before;\
      and when at last Bosinney went, he said: \'93You must come again\
      soon; Irene likes to have you to talk about the house!\'94 Again his\
      voice had the strange bravado and the stranger pathos; but his\
      hand was cold as ice.\
\
      Loyal to his resolution, he turned away from their parting,\
      turned away from his wife as she stood under the hanging lamp to\
      say good-night\'97away from the sight of her golden head shining so\
      under the light, of her smiling mournful lips; away from the\
      sight of Bosinney\'92s eyes looking at her, so like a dog\'92s looking\
      at its master.\
\
      And he went to bed with the certainty that Bosinney was in love\
      with his wife.\
\
      The summer night was hot, so hot and still that through every\
      opened window came in but hotter air. For long hours he lay\
      listening to her breathing.\
\
      She could sleep, but he must lie awake. And, lying awake, he\
      hardened himself to play the part of the serene and trusting\
      husband.\
\
      In the small hours he slipped out of bed, and passing into his\
      dressing-room, leaned by the open window.\
\
      He could hardly breathe.\
\
      A night four years ago came back to him\'97the night but one before\
      his marriage; as hot and stifling as this.\
\
      He remembered how he had lain in a long cane chair in the window\
      of his sitting-room off Victoria Street. Down below in a side\
      street a man had banged at a door, a woman had cried out; he\
      remembered, as though it were now, the sound of the scuffle, the\
      slam of the door, the dead silence that followed. And then the\
      early water-cart, cleansing the reek of the streets, had\
      approached through the strange-seeming, useless lamp-light; he\
      seemed to hear again its rumble, nearer and nearer, till it\
      passed and slowly died away.\
\
      He leaned far out of the dressing-room window over the little\
      court below, and saw the first light spread. The outlines of dark\
      walls and roofs were blurred for a moment, then came out sharper\
      than before.\
\
      He remembered how that other night he had watched the lamps\
      paling all the length of Victoria Street; how he had hurried on\
      his clothes and gone down into the street, down past houses and\
      squares, to the street where she was staying, and there had stood\
      and looked at the front of the little house, as still and grey as\
      the face of a dead man.\
\
      And suddenly it shot through his mind; like a sick man\'92s fancy:\
      What\'92s _he_ doing?\'97that fellow who haunts me, who was here this\
      evening, who\'92s in love with my wife\'97prowling out there, perhaps,\
      looking for her as I know he was looking for her this afternoon;\
      watching my house now, for all I can tell!\
\
      He stole across the landing to the front of the house, stealthily\
      drew aside a blind, and raised a window.\
\
      The grey light clung about the trees of the square, as though\
      Night, like a great downy moth, had brushed them with her wings.\
      The lamps were still alight, all pale, but not a soul stirred\'97no\
      living thing in sight.\
\
      Yet suddenly, very faint, far off in the deathly stillness, he\
      heard a cry writhing, like the voice of some wandering soul\
      barred out of heaven, and crying for its happiness. There it was\
      again\'97again! Soames shut the window, shuddering.\
\
      Then he thought: \'93Ah! it\'92s only the peacocks, across the water.\'94\
\
\
      CHAPTER XII JUNE PAYS SOME CALLS\
\
      Jolyon stood in the narrow hall at Broadstairs, inhaling that\
      odour of oilcloth and herrings which permeates all respectable\
      seaside lodging-houses. On a chair\'97a shiny leather chair,\
      displaying its horsehair through a hole in the top left-hand\
      corner\'97stood a black despatch case. This he was filling with\
      papers, with the _Times_, and a bottle of Eau-de Cologne. He had\
      meetings that day of the \'93Globular Gold Concessions\'94 and the \'93New\
      Colliery Company, Limited,\'94 to which he was going up, for he\
      never missed a Board; to \'93miss a Board\'94 would be one more piece\
      of evidence that he was growing old, and this his jealous Forsyte\
      spirit could not bear.\
\
      His eyes, as he filled that black despatch case, looked as if at\
      any moment they might blaze up with anger. So gleams the eye of a\
      schoolboy, baited by a ring of his companions; but he controls\
      himself, deterred by the fearful odds against him. And old Jolyon\
      controlled himself, keeping down, with his masterful restraint\
      now slowly wearing out, the irritation fostered in him by the\
      conditions of his life.\
\
      He had received from his son an unpractical letter, in which by\
      rambling generalities the boy seemed trying to get out of\
      answering a plain question. \'93I\'92ve seen Bosinney,\'94 he said; \'93he is\
      not a criminal. The more I see of people the more I am convinced\
      that they are never good or bad\'97merely comic, or pathetic. You\
      probably don\'92t agree with me!\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon did not; he considered it cynical to so express\
      oneself; he had not yet reached that point of old age when even\
      Forsytes, bereft of those illusions and principles which they\
      have cherished carefully for practical purposes but never\
      believed in, bereft of all corporeal enjoyment, stricken to the\
      very heart by having nothing left to hope for\'97break through the\
      barriers of reserve and say things they would never have believed\
      themselves capable of saying.\
\
      Perhaps he did not believe in \'93goodness\'94 and \'93badness\'94 any more\
      than his son; but as he would have said: He didn\'92t know\'97couldn\'92t\
      tell; there might be something in it; and why, by an unnecessary\
      expression of disbelief, deprive yourself of possible advantage?\
\
      Accustomed to spend his holidays among the mountains, though\
      (like a true Forsyte) he had never attempted anything too\
      adventurous or too foolhardy, he had been passionately fond of\
      them. And when the wonderful view (mentioned in\
      Baedeker\'97\'93fatiguing but repaying\'94.\'97was disclosed to him after the\
      effort of the climb, he had doubtless felt the existence of some\
      great, dignified principle crowning the chaotic strivings, the\
      petty precipices, and ironic little dark chasms of life. This was\
      as near to religion, perhaps, as his practical spirit had ever\
      gone.\
\
      But it was many years since he had been to the mountains. He had\
      taken June there two seasons running, after his wife died, and\
      had realized bitterly that his walking days were over.\
\
      To that old mountain\'97given confidence in a supreme order of\
      things he had long been a stranger.\
\
      He knew himself to be old, yet he felt young; and this troubled\
      him. It troubled and puzzled him, too, to think that he, who had\
      always been so careful, should be father and grandfather to such\
      as seemed born to disaster. He had nothing to say against Jo\'97who\
      could say anything against the boy, an amiable chap?\'97but his\
      position was deplorable, and this business of Jun\'92s nearly as\
      bad. It seemed like a fatality, and a fatality was one of those\
      things no man of his character could either understand or put up\
      with.\
\
      In writing to his son he did not really hope that anything would\
      come of it. Since the ball at Roger\'92s he had seen too clearly how\
      the land lay\'97he could put two and two together quicker than most\
      men\'97and, with the example of his own son before his eyes, knew\
      better than any Forsyte of them all that the pale flame singes\
      men\'92s wings whether they will or no.\
\
      In the days before Jun\'92s engagement, when she and Mrs. Soames\
      were always together, he had seen enough of Irene to feel the\
      spell she cast over men. She was not a flirt, not even a\
      coquette\'97words dear to the heart of his generation, which loved\
      to define things by a good, broad, inadequate word\'97but she was\
      dangerous. He could not say why. Tell him of a quality innate in\
      some women\'97a seductive power beyond their own control! He would\
      but answer: \'93Humbug!\'94 She was dangerous, and there was an end of\
      it. He wanted to close his eyes to that affair. If it was, it\
      was; _he_ did not want to hear any more about it\'97he only wanted\
      to save Jun\'92s position and her peace of mind. He still hoped she\
      might once more become a comfort to himself.\
\
      And so he had written. He got little enough out of the answer. As\
      to what young Jolyon had made of the interview, there was\
      practically only the queer sentence: \'93I gather that he\'92s in the\
      stream.\'94 The stream! What stream? What was this new-fangled way\
      of talking?\
\
      He sighed, and folded the last of the papers under the flap of\
      the bag; he knew well enough what was meant.\
\
      June came out of the dining-room, and helped him on with his\
      summer coat. From her costume, and the expression of her little\
      resolute face, he saw at once what was coming.\
\
      \'93I\'92m going with you,\'94 she said.\
\
      \'93Nonsense, my dear; I go straight into the City. I can\'92t have you\
      racketting about!\'94\
\
      \'93I must see old Mrs. Smeech.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, your precious \'91lame ducks\'92!\'94 grumbled out old Jolyon. He did\
      not believe her excuse, but ceased his opposition. There was no\
      doing anything with that pertinacity of hers.\
\
      At Victoria he put her into the carriage which had been ordered\
      for himself\'97a characteristic action, for he had no petty\
      selfishnesses.\
\
      \'93Now, don\'92t you go tiring yourself, my darling,\'94 he said, and\
      took a cab on into the city.\
\
      June went first to a back-street in Paddington, where Mrs.\
      Smeech, her \'93lame duck,\'94 lived\'97an aged person, connected with the\
      charring interest; but after half an hour spent in hearing her\
      habitually lamentable recital, and dragooning her into temporary\
      comfort, she went on to Stanhope Gate. The great house was closed\
      and dark.\
\
      She had decided to learn something at all costs. It was better to\
      face the worst, and have it over. And this was her plan: To go\
      first to Phil\'92s aunt, Mrs. Baynes, and, failing information\
      there, to Irene herself. She had no clear notion of what she\
      would gain by these visits.\
\
      At three o\'92clock she was in Lowndes Square. With a woman\'92s\
      instinct when trouble is to be faced, she had put on her best\
      frock, and went to the battle with a glance as courageous as old\
      Jolyon\'92s itself. Her tremors had passed into eagerness.\
\
      Mrs. Baynes, Bosinney\'92s aunt (Louisa was her name), was in her\
      kitchen when June was announced, organizing the cook, for she was\
      an excellent housewife, and, as Baynes always said, there was \'93a\
      lot in a good dinner.\'94 He did his best work after dinner. It was\
      Baynes who built that remarkably fine row of tall crimson houses\
      in Kensington which compete with so many others for the title of\
      \'93the ugliest in London.\'94\
\
      On hearing Jun\'92s name, she went hurriedly to her bedroom, and,\
      taking two large bracelets from a red morocco case in a locked\
      drawer, put them on her white wrists\'97for she possessed in a\
      remarkable degree that \'93sense of property,\'94 which, as we know, is\
      the touchstone of Forsyteism, and the foundation of good\
      morality.\
\
      Her figure, of medium height and broad build, with a tendency to\
      embonpoint, was reflected by the mirror of her whitewood\
      wardrobe, in a gown made under her own organization, of one of\
      those half-tints, reminiscent of the distempered walls of\
      corridors in large hotels. She raised her hands to her hair,\
      which she wore _\'e0 la_ Princesse de Galles, and touched it here\
      and there, settling it more firmly on her head, and her eyes were\
      full of an unconscious realism, as though she were looking in the\
      face one of life\'92s sordid facts, and making the best of it. In\
      youth her cheeks had been of cream and roses, but they were\
      mottled now by middle-age, and again that hard, ugly directness\
      came into her eyes as she dabbed a powder-puff across her\
      forehead. Putting the puff down, she stood quite still before the\
      glass, arranging a smile over her high, important nose, her chin,\
      (never large, and now growing smaller with the increase of her\
      neck), her thin-lipped, down-drooping mouth. Quickly, not to lose\
      the effect, she grasped her skirts strongly in both hands, and\
      went downstairs.\
\
      She had been hoping for this visit for some time past. Whispers\
      had reached her that things were not all right between her nephew\
      and his fianc\'e9e. Neither of them had been near her for weeks. She\
      had asked Phil to dinner many times; his invariable answer had\
      been \'93Too busy.\'94\
\
      Her instinct was alarmed, and the instinct in such matters of\
      this excellent woman was keen. She ought to have been a Forsyte;\
      in young Jolyon\'92s sense of the word, she certainly had that\
      privilege, and merits description as such.\
\
      She had married off her three daughters in a way that people said\
      was beyond their deserts, for they had the professional plainness\
      only to be found, as a rule, among the female kind of the more\
      legal callings. Her name was upon the committees of numberless\
      charities connected with the Church-dances, theatricals, or\
      bazaars\'97and she never lent her name unless sure beforehand that\
      everything had been thoroughly organized.\
\
      She believed, as she often said, in putting things on a\
      commercial basis; the proper function of the Church, of charity,\
      indeed, of everything, was to strengthen the fabric of \'93Society.\'94\
      Individual action, therefore, she considered immoral.\
      Organization was the only thing, for by organization alone could\
      you feel sure that you were getting a return for your money.\
      Organization\'97and again, organization! And there is no doubt that\
      she was what old Jolyon called her\'97\'93a \'91dab\'92 at that\'94\'97he went\
      further, he called her \'93a humbug.\'94\
\
      The enterprises to which she lent her name were organized so\
      admirably that by the time the takings were handed over, they\
      were indeed skim milk divested of all cream of human kindness.\
      But as she often justly remarked, sentiment was to be deprecated.\
      She was, in fact, a little academic.\
\
      This great and good woman, so highly thought of in ecclesiastical\
      circles, was one of the principal priestesses in the temple of\
      Forsyteism, keeping alive day and night a sacred flame to the God\
      of Property, whose altar is inscribed with those inspiring words:\
      \'93Nothing for nothing, and really remarkably little for sixpence.\'94\
\
      When she entered a room it was felt that something substantial\
      had come in, which was probably the reason of her popularity as a\
      patroness. People liked something substantial when they had paid\
      money for it; and they would look at her\'97surrounded by her staff\
      in charity ballrooms, with her high nose and her broad, square\
      figure, attired in an uniform covered with sequins\'97as though she\
      were a general.\
\
      The only thing against her was that she had not a double name.\
      She was a power in upper middle-class society, with its hundred\
      sets and circles, all intersecting on the common battlefield of\
      charity functions, and on that battlefield brushing skirts so\
      pleasantly with the skirts of Society with the capital \'93S.\'94 She\
      was a power in society with the smaller \'93s,\'94 that larger, more\
      significant, and more powerful body, where the commercially\
      Christian institutions, maxims, and \'93principle,\'94 which Mrs.\
      Baynes embodied, were real life-blood, circulating freely, real\
      business currency, not merely the sterilized imitation that\
      flowed in the veins of smaller Society with the larger \'93S.\'94\
      People who knew her felt her to be sound\'97a sound woman, who never\
      gave herself away, nor anything else, if she could possibly help\
      it.\
\
      She had been on the worst sort of terms with Bosinney\'92s father,\
      who had not infrequently made her the object of an unpardonable\
      ridicule. She alluded to him now that he was gone as her \'93poor,\
      dear, irreverend brother.\'94\
\
      She greeted June with the careful effusion of which she was a\
      mistress, a little afraid of her as far as a woman of her\
      eminence in the commercial and Christian world could be\
      afraid\'97for so slight a girl June had a great dignity, the\
      fearlessness of her eyes gave her that. And Mrs. Baynes, too,\
      shrewdly recognized that behind the uncompromising frankness of\
      Jun\'92s manner there was much of the Forsyte. If the girl had been\
      merely frank and courageous, Mrs. Baynes would have thought her\
      \'93cranky,\'94 and despised her; if she had been merely a Forsyte,\
      like Francie\'97let us say\'97she would have patronized her from sheer\
      weight of metal; but June, small though she was\'97Mrs. Baynes\
      habitually admired quantity\'97gave her an uneasy feeling; and she\
      placed her in a chair opposite the light.\
\
      There was another reason for her respect which Mrs. Baynes, too\
      good a churchwoman to be worldly, would have been the last to\
      admit\'97she often heard her husband describe old Jolyon as\
      extremely well off, and was biassed towards his granddaughter for\
      the soundest of all reasons. To-day she felt the emotion with\
      which we read a novel describing a hero and an inheritance,\
      nervously anxious lest, by some frightful lapse of the novelist,\
      the young man should be left without it at the end.\
\
      Her manner was warm; she had never seen so clearly before how\
      distinguished and desirable a girl this was. She asked after old\
      Jolyon\'92s health. A wonderful man for his age; so upright, and\
      young looking, and how old was he? Eighty-one! She would never\
      have thought it! They were at the sea! Very nice for them; she\
      supposed June heard from Phil every day? Her light grey eyes\
      became more prominent as she asked this question; but the girl\
      met the glance without flinching.\
\
      \'93No,\'94 she said, \'93he never writes!\'94\
\
      Mrs. Baynes\'92s eyes dropped; they had no intention of doing so,\
      but they did. They recovered immediately.\
\
      \'93Of course not. That\'92s Phil all over\'97he was always like that!\'94\
\
      \'93Was he?\'94 said June.\
\
      The brevity of the answer caused Mrs. Baynes\'92s bright smile a\
      moment\'92s hesitation; she disguised it by a quick movement, and\
      spreading her skirts afresh, said: \'93Why, my dear\'97he\'92s quite the\
      most harum-scarum person; one never pays the slightest attention\
      to what _he_ does!\'94\
\
      The conviction came suddenly to June that she was wasting her\
      time; even were she to put a question point-blank, she would\
      never get anything out of this woman.\
\
      \'93Do you see him?\'94 she asked, her face crimsoning.\
\
      The perspiration broke out on Mrs. Baynes\'92 forehead beneath the\
      powder.\
\
      \'93Oh, yes! I don\'92t remember when he was here last\'97indeed, we\
      haven\'92t seen much of him lately. He\'92s so busy with your cousin\'92s\
      house; I\'92m told it\'92ll be finished directly. We must organize a\
      little dinner to celebrate the event; do come and stay the night\
      with us!\'94\
\
      \'93Thank you,\'94 said June. Again she thought: \'93I\'92m only wasting my\
      time. This woman will tell me nothing.\'94\
\
      She got up to go. A change came over Mrs. Baynes. She rose too;\
      her lips twitched, she fidgeted her hands. Something was\
      evidently very wrong, and she did not dare to ask this girl, who\
      stood there, a slim, straight little figure, with her decided\
      face, her set jaw, and resentful eyes. She was not accustomed to\
      be afraid of asking questions\'97all organization was based on the\
      asking of questions!\
\
      But the issue was so grave that her nerve, normally strong, was\
      fairly shaken; only that morning her husband had said: \'93Old Mr.\
      Forsyte must be worth well over a hundred thousand pounds!\'94\
\
      And this girl stood there, holding out her hand\'97holding out her\
      hand!\
\
      The chance might be slipping away\'97she couldn\'92t tell\'97the chance of\
      keeping her in the family, and yet she dared not speak.\
\
      Her eyes followed June to the door.\
\
      It closed.\
\
      Then with an exclamation Mrs. Baynes ran forward, wobbling her\
      bulky frame from side to side, and opened it again.\
\
      Too late! She heard the front door click, and stood still, an\
      expression of real anger and mortification on her face.\
\
      June went along the Square with her bird-like quickness. She\
      detested that woman now whom in happier days she had been\
      accustomed to think so kind. Was she always to be put off thus,\
      and forced to undergo this torturing suspense?\
\
      She would go to Phil himself, and ask him what he meant. She had\
      the right to know. She hurried on down Sloane Street till she\
      came to Bosinney\'92s number. Passing the swing-door at the bottom,\
      she ran up the stairs, her heart thumping painfully.\
\
      At the top of the third flight she paused for breath, and holding\
      on to the bannisters, stood listening. No sound came from above.\
\
      With a very white face she mounted the last flight. She saw the\
      door, with his name on the plate. And the resolution that had\
      brought her so far evaporated.\
\
      The full meaning of her conduct came to her. She felt hot all\
      over; the palms of her hands were moist beneath the thin silk\
      covering of her gloves.\
\
      She drew back to the stairs, but did not descend. Leaning against\
      the rail she tried to get rid of a feeling of being choked; and\
      she gazed at the door with a sort of dreadful courage. No! she\
      refused to go down. Did it matter what people thought of her?\
      They would never know! No one would help her if she did not help\
      herself! She would go through with it.\
\
      Forcing herself, therefore, to leave the support of the wall, she\
      rang the bell. The door did not open, and all her shame and fear\
      suddenly abandoned her; she rang again and again, as though in\
      spite of its emptiness she could drag some response out of that\
      closed room, some recompense for the shame and fear that visit\
      had cost her. It did not open; she left off ringing, and, sitting\
      down at the top of the stairs, buried her face in her hands.\
\
      Presently she stole down, out into the air. She felt as though\
      she had passed through a bad illness, and had no desire now but\
      to get home as quickly as she could. The people she met seemed to\
      know where she had been, what she had been doing; and\
      suddenly\'97over on the opposite side, going towards his rooms from\
      the direction of Montpellier Square\'97she saw Bosinney himself.\
\
      She made a movement to cross into the traffic. Their eyes met,\
      and he raised his hat. An omnibus passed, obscuring her view;\
      then, from the edge of the pavement, through a gap in the\
      traffic, she saw him walking on.\
\
      And June stood motionless, looking after him.\
\
\
      CHAPTER XIII PERFECTION OF THE HOUSE\
\
      \'93One mockturtle, clear; one oxtail; two glasses of port.\'94\
\
      In the upper room at French\'92s, where a Forsyte could still get\
      heavy English food, James and his son were sitting down to lunch.\
\
      Of all eating-places James liked best to come here; there was\
      something unpretentious, well-flavoured, and filling about it,\
      and though he had been to a certain extent corrupted by the\
      necessity for being fashionable, and the trend of habits keeping\
      pace with an income that _would_ increase, he still hankered in\
      quiet City moments after the tasty fleshpots of his earlier days.\
      Here you were served by hairy English waiters in aprons; there\
      was sawdust on the floor, and three round gilt looking-glasses\
      hung just above the line of sight. They had only recently done\
      away with the cubicles, too, in which you could have your chop,\
      prime chump, with a floury-potato, without seeing your\
      neighbours, like a gentleman.\
\
      He tucked the top corner of his napkin behind the third button of\
      his waistcoat, a practice he had been obliged to abandon years\
      ago in the West End. He felt that he should relish his soup\'97the\
      entire morning had been given to winding up the estate of an old\
      friend.\
\
      After filling his mouth with household bread, stale, he at once\
      began: \'93How are you going down to Robin Hill? You going to take\
      Irene? You\'92d better take her. I should think there\'92ll be a lot\
      that\'92ll want seeing to.\'94\
\
      Without looking up, Soames answered: \'93She won\'92t go.\'94\
\
      \'93Won\'92t go? What\'92s the meaning of that? She\'92s going to live in the\
      house, isn\'92t she?\'94\
\
      Soames made no reply.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know what\'92s coming to women nowadays,\'94 mumbled James; \'93I\
      never used to have any trouble with them. She\'92s had too much\
      liberty. She\'92s spoiled....\'94\
\
      Soames lifted his eyes: \'93I won\'92t have anything said against her,\'94\
      he said unexpectedly.\
\
      The silence was only broken now by the supping of James\'92s soup.\
\
      The waiter brought the two glasses of port, but Soames stopped\
      him.\
\
      \'93That\'92s not the way to serve port,\'94 he said; \'93take them away, and\
      bring the bottle.\'94\
\
      Rousing himself from his reverie over the soup, James took one of\
      his rapid shifting surveys of surrounding facts.\
\
      \'93Your mother\'92s in bed,\'94 he said; \'93you can have the carriage to\
      take you down. I should think Irene\'92d like the drive. This young\
      Bosinney\'92ll be there, I suppose, to show you over.\'94\
\
      Soames nodded.\
\
      \'93I should like to go and see for myself what sort of a job he\'92s\
      made finishing off,\'94 pursued James. \'93I\'92ll just drive round and\
      pick you both up.\'94\
\
      \'93I am going down by train,\'94 replied Soames. \'93If you like to drive\
      round and see, Irene might go with you, I can\'92t tell.\'94\
\
      He signed to the waiter to bring the bill, which James paid.\
\
      They parted at St. Paul\'92s, Soames branching off to the station,\
      James taking his omnibus westwards.\
\
      He had secured the corner seat next the conductor, where his long\
      legs made it difficult for anyone to get in, and at all who\
      passed him he looked resentfully, as if they had no business to\
      be using up his air.\
\
      He intended to take an opportunity this afternoon of speaking to\
      Irene. A word in time saved nine; and now that she was going to\
      live in the country there was a chance for her to turn over a new\
      leaf! He could see that Soames wouldn\'92t stand very much more of\
      her goings on!\
\
      It did not occur to him to define what he meant by her \'93goings\
      on\'94. the expression was wide, vague, and suited to a Forsyte. And\
      James had more than his common share of courage after lunch.\
\
      On reaching home, he ordered out the barouche, with special\
      instructions that the groom was to go too. He wished to be kind\
      to her, and to give her every chance.\
\
      When the door of No.62 was opened he could distinctly hear her\
      singing, and said so at once, to prevent any chance of being\
      denied entrance.\
\
      Yes, Mrs. Soames was in, but the maid did not know if she was\
      seeing people.\
\
      James, moving with the rapidity that ever astonished the\
      observers of his long figure and absorbed expression, went\
      forthwith into the drawing-room without permitting this to be\
      ascertained. He found Irene seated at the piano with her hands\
      arrested on the keys, evidently listening to the voices in the\
      hall. She greeted him without smiling.\
\
      \'93Your mother-in-law\'92s in bed,\'94 he began, hoping at once to enlist\
      her sympathy. \'93I\'92ve got the carriage here. Now, be a good girl,\
      and put on your hat and come with me for a drive. It\'92ll do you\
      good!\'94\
\
      Irene looked at him as though about to refuse, but, seeming to\
      change her mind, went upstairs, and came down again with her hat\
      on.\
\
      \'93Where are you going to take me?\'94 she asked.\
\
      \'93We\'92ll just go down to Robin Hill,\'94 said James, spluttering out\
      his words very quick; \'93the horses want exercise, and I should\
      like to see what they\'92ve been doing down there.\'94\
\
      Irene hung back, but again changed her mind, and went out to the\
      carriage, James brooding over her closely, to make quite sure.\
\
      It was not before he had got her more than half way that he\
      began: \'93Soames is very fond of you\'97he won\'92t have anything said\
      against you; why don\'92t you show him more affection?\'94\
\
      Irene flushed, and said in a low voice: \'93I can\'92t show what I\
      haven\'92t got.\'94\
\
      James looked at her sharply; he felt that now he had her in his\
      own carriage, with his own horses and servants, he was really in\
      command of the situation. She could not put him off; nor would\
      she make a scene in public.\
\
      \'93I can\'92t think what you\'92re about,\'94 he said. \'93He\'92s a very good\
      husband!\'94\
\
      Irene\'92s answer was so low as to be almost inaudible among the\
      sounds of traffic. He caught the words: \'93You are not married to\
      him!\'94\
\
      \'93What\'92s that got to do with it? He\'92s given you everything you\
      want. He\'92s always ready to take you anywhere, and now he\'92s built\
      you this house in the country. It\'92s not as if you had anything of\
      your own.\'94\
\
      \'93No.\'94\
\
      Again James looked at her; he could not make out the expression\
      on her face. She looked almost as if she were going to cry, and\
      yet....\
\
      \'93I\'92m sure,\'94 he muttered hastily, \'93we\'92ve all tried to be kind to\
      you.\'94\
\
      Irene\'92s lips quivered; to his dismay James saw a tear steal down\
      her cheek. He felt a choke rise in his own throat.\
\
      \'93We\'92re all fond of you,\'94 he said, \'93if you\'92d only\'94\'97he was going to\
      say, \'93behave yourself,\'94 but changed it to\'97\'93if you\'92d only be more\
      of a wife to him.\'94\
\
      Irene did not answer, and James, too, ceased speaking. There was\
      something in her silence which disconcerted him; it was not the\
      silence of obstinacy, rather that of acquiescence in all that he\
      could find to say. And yet he felt as if he had not had the last\
      word. He could not understand this.\
\
      He was unable, however, to long keep silence.\
\
      \'93I suppose that young Bosinney,\'94 he said, \'93will be getting\
      married to June now?\'94\
\
      Irene\'92s face changed. \'93I don\'92t know,\'94 she said; \'93you should ask\
      _her_.\'94\
\
      \'93Does she write to you?\'94\
\
      \'93No.\'94\
\
      \'93No.\'94\
\
      \'93How\'92s that?\'94 said James. \'93I thought you and she were such great\
      friends.\'94\
\
      Irene turned on him. \'93Again,\'94 she said, \'93you should ask _her!_\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 flustered James, frightened by her look, \'93it\'92s very odd\
      that I can\'92t get a plain answer to a plain question, but there it\
      is.\'94\
\
      He sat ruminating over his rebuff, and burst out at last:\
\
      \'93Well, I\'92ve warned you. You won\'92t look ahead. Soames he doesn\'92t\
      say much, but I can see he won\'92t stand a great deal more of this\
      sort of thing. You\'92ll have nobody but yourself to blame, and,\
      what\'92s more, you\'92ll get no sympathy from anybody.\'94\
\
      Irene bent her head with a little smiling bow. \'93I am very much\
      obliged to you.\'94\
\
      James did not know what on earth to answer.\
\
      The bright hot morning had changed slowly to a grey, oppressive\
      afternoon; a heavy bank of clouds, with the yellow tinge of\
      coming thunder, had risen in the south, and was creeping up.\
\
      The branches of the trees dropped motionless across the road\
      without the smallest stir of foliage. A faint odour of glue from\
      the heated horses clung in the thick air; the coachman and groom,\
      rigid and unbending, exchanged stealthy murmurs on the box,\
      without ever turning their heads.\
\
      To James\'92 great relief they reached the house at last; the\
      silence and impenetrability of this woman by his side, whom he\
      had always thought so soft and mild, alarmed him.\
\
      The carriage put them down at the door, and they entered.\
\
      The hall was cool, and so still that it was like passing into a\
      tomb; a shudder ran down James\'92s spine. He quickly lifted the\
      heavy leather curtains between the columns into the inner court.\
\
      He could not restrain an exclamation of approval.\
\
      The decoration was really in excellent taste. The dull ruby tiles\
      that extended from the foot of the walls to the verge of a\
      circular clump of tall iris plants, surrounding in turn a sunken\
      basin of white marble filled with water, were obviously of the\
      best quality. He admired extremely the purple leather curtains\
      drawn along one entire side, framing a huge white-tiled stove.\
      The central partitions of the skylight had been slid back, and\
      the warm air from outside penetrated into the very heart of the\
      house.\
\
      He stood, his hands behind him, his head bent back on his high,\
      narrow shoulders, spying the tracery on the columns and the\
      pattern of the frieze which ran round the ivory-coloured walls\
      under the gallery. Evidently, no pains had been spared. It was\
      quite the house of a gentleman. He went up to the curtains, and,\
      having discovered how they were worked, drew them asunder and\
      disclosed the picture-gallery, ending in a great window taking up\
      the whole end of the room. It had a black oak floor, and its\
      walls, again, were of ivory white. He went on throwing open\
      doors, and peeping in. Everything was in apple-pie order, ready\
      for immediate occupation.\
\
      He turned round at last to speak to Irene, and saw her standing\
      over in the garden entrance, with her husband and Bosinney.\
\
      Though not remarkable for sensibility, James felt at once that\
      something was wrong. He went up to them, and, vaguely alarmed,\
      ignorant of the nature of the trouble, made an attempt to smooth\
      things over.\
\
      \'93How are you, Mr. Bosinney?\'94 he said, holding out his hand.\
      \'93You\'92ve been spending money pretty freely down here, I should\
      say!\'94\
\
      Soames turned his back, and walked away.\
\
      James looked from Bosinney\'92s frowning face to Irene, and, in his\
      agitation, spoke his thoughts aloud: \'93Well, I can\'92t tell what\'92s\
      the matter. Nobody tells me anything!\'94 And, making off after his\
      son, he heard Bosinney\'92s short laugh, and his \'93Well, thank God!\
      You look so....\'94 Most unfortunately he lost the rest.\
\
      What had happened? He glanced back. Irene was very close to the\
      architect, and her face not like the face he knew of her. He\
      hastened up to his son.\
\
      Soames was pacing the picture-gallery.\
\
      \'93What\'92s the matter?\'94 said James. \'93What\'92s all this?\'94\
\
      Soames looked at him with his supercilious calm unbroken, but\
      James knew well enough that he was violently angry.\
\
      \'93Our friend,\'94 he said, \'93has exceeded his instructions again,\
      that\'92s all. So much the worse for him this time.\'94\
\
      He turned round and walked back towards the door. James followed\
      hurriedly, edging himself in front. He saw Irene take her finger\
      from before her lips, heard her say something in her ordinary\
      voice, and began to speak before he reached them.\
\
      \'93There\'92s a storm coming on. We\'92d better get home. We can\'92t take\
      you, I suppose, Mr. Bosinney? No, I suppose not. Then, good-bye!\'94\
      He held out his hand. Bosinney did not take it, but, turning with\
      a laugh, said:\
\
      \'93Good-bye, Mr. Forsyte. Don\'92t get caught in the storm!\'94 and\
      walked away.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 began James, \'93I don\'92t know....\'94\
\
      But the sight of Irene\'92s face stopped him. Taking hold of his\
      daughter-in-law by the elbow, he escorted her towards the\
      carriage. He felt certain, quite certain, they had been making\
      some appointment or other....\
\
      Nothing in this world is more sure to upset a Forsyte than the\
      discovery that something on which he has stipulated to spend a\
      certain sum has cost more. And this is reasonable, for upon the\
      accuracy of his estimates the whole policy of his life is\
      ordered. If he cannot rely on definite values of property, his\
      compass is amiss; he is adrift upon bitter waters without a helm.\
\
      After writing to Bosinney in the terms that have already been\
      chronicled, Soames had dismissed the cost of the house from his\
      mind. He believed that he had made the matter of the final cost\
      so very plain that the possibility of its being again exceeded\
      had really never entered his head. On hearing from Bosinney that\
      his limit of twelve thousand pounds would be exceeded by\
      something like four hundred, he had grown white with anger. His\
      original estimate of the cost of the house completed had been ten\
      thousand pounds, and he had often blamed himself severely for\
      allowing himself to be led into repeated excesses. Over this last\
      expenditure, however, Bosinney had put himself completely in the\
      wrong. How on earth a fellow could make such an ass of himself\
      Soames could not conceive; but he had done so, and all the\
      rancour and hidden jealousy that had been burning against him for\
      so long was now focussed in rage at this crowning piece of\
      extravagance. The attitude of the confident and friendly husband\
      was gone. To preserve property\'97his wife\'97he had assumed it, to\
      preserve property of another kind he lost it now.\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 he had said to Bosinney when he could speak, \'93and I suppose\
      you\'92re perfectly contented with yourself. But I may as well tell\
      you that you\'92ve altogether mistaken your man!\'94\
\
      What he meant by those words he did not quite know at the time,\
      but after dinner he looked up the correspondence between himself\
      and Bosinney to make quite sure. There could be no two opinions\
      about it\'97the fellow had made himself liable for that extra four\
      hundred, or, at all events, for three hundred and fifty of it,\
      and he would have to make it good.\
\
      He was looking at his wife\'92s face when he came to this\
      conclusion. Seated in her usual seat on the sofa, she was\
      altering the lace on a collar. She had not once spoken to him all\
      the evening.\
\
      He went up to the mantelpiece, and contemplating his face in the\
      mirror said: \'93Your friend the Buccaneer has made a fool of\
      himself; he will have to pay for it!\'94\
\
      She looked at him scornfully, and answered: \'93I don\'92t know what\
      you are talking about!\'94\
\
      \'93You soon will. A mere trifle, quite beneath your contempt\'97four\
      hundred pounds.\'94\
\
      \'93Do you mean that you are going to make him pay that towards this\
      hateful, house?\'94\
\
      \'93I do.\'94\
\
      \'93And you know he\'92s got nothing?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      \'93Then you are meaner than I thought you.\'94\
\
      Soames turned from the mirror, and unconsciously taking a china\
      cup from the mantelpiece, clasped his hands around it as though\
      praying. He saw her bosom rise and fall, her eyes darkening with\
      anger, and taking no notice of the taunt, he asked quietly:\
\
      \'93Are you carrying on a flirtation with Bosinney?\'94\
\
      \'93No, I am not!\'94\
\
      Her eyes met his, and he looked away. He neither believed nor\
      disbelieved her, but he knew that he had made a mistake in\
      asking; he never had known, never would know, what she was\
      thinking. The sight of her inscrutable face, the thought of all\
      the hundreds of evenings he had seen her sitting there like that\
      soft and passive, but unreadable, unknown, enraged him beyond\
      measure.\
\
      \'93I believe you are made of stone,\'94 he said, clenching his fingers\
      so hard that he broke the fragile cup. The pieces fell into the\
      grate. And Irene smiled.\
\
      \'93You seem to forget,\'94 she said, \'93that cup is not!\'94\
\
      Soames gripped her arm. \'93A good beating,\'94 he said, \'93is the only\
      thing that would bring you to your senses,\'94 but turning on his\
      heel, he left the room.\
\
\
      CHAPTER XIV SOAMES SITS ON THE STAIRS\
\
      Soames went up-stairs that night with the feeling that he had\
      gone too far. He was prepared to offer excuses for his words.\
\
      He turned out the gas still burning in the passage outside their\
      room. Pausing, with his hand on the knob of the door, he tried to\
      shape his apology, for he had no intention of letting her see\
      that he was nervous.\
\
      But the door did not open, nor when he pulled it and turned the\
      handle firmly. She must have locked it for some reason, and\
      forgotten.\
\
      Entering his dressing-room, where the gas was also lighted and\
      burning low, he went quickly to the other door. That too was\
      locked. Then he noticed that the camp bed which he occasionally\
      used was prepared, and his sleeping-suit laid out upon it. He put\
      his hand up to his forehead, and brought it away wet. It dawned\
      on him that he was barred out.\
\
      He went back to the door, and rattling the handle stealthily,\
      called: \'93Unlock the door, do you hear? Unlock the door!\'94\
\
      There was a faint rustling, but no answer.\
\
      \'93Do you hear? Let me in at once\'97I insist on being let in!\'94\
\
      He could catch the sound of her breathing close to the door, like\
      the breathing of a creature threatened by danger.\
\
      There was something terrifying in this inexorable silence, in the\
      impossibility of getting at her. He went back to the other door,\
      and putting his whole weight against it, tried to burst it open.\
      The door was a new one\'97he had had them renewed himself, in\
      readiness for their coming in after the honeymoon. In a rage he\
      lifted his foot to kick in the panel; the thought of the servants\
      restrained him, and he felt suddenly that he was beaten.\
\
      Flinging himself down in the dressing-room, he took up a book.\
\
      But instead of the print he seemed to see his wife\'97with her\
      yellow hair flowing over her bare shoulders, and her great dark\
      eyes\'97standing like an animal at bay. And the whole meaning of her\
      act of revolt came to him. She meant it to be for good.\
\
      He could not sit still, and went to the door again. He could\
      still hear her, and he called: \'93Irene! Irene!\'94\
\
      He did not mean to make his voice pathetic.\
\
      In ominous answer, the faint sounds ceased. He stood with\
      clenched hands, thinking.\
\
      Presently he stole round on tiptoe, and running suddenly at the\
      other door, made a supreme effort to break it open. It creaked,\
      but did not yield. He sat down on the stairs and buried his face\
      in his hands.\
\
      For a long time he sat there in the dark, the moon through the\
      skylight above laying a pale smear which lengthened slowly\
      towards him down the stairway. He tried to be philosophical.\
\
      Since she had locked her doors she had no further claim as a\
      wife, and he would console himself with other women.\
\
      It was but a spectral journey he made among such delights\'97he had\
      no appetite for these exploits. He had never had much, and he had\
      lost the habit. He felt that he could never recover it. His\
      hunger could only be appeased by his wife, inexorable and\
      frightened, behind these shut doors. No other woman could help\
      him.\
\
      This conviction came to him with terrible force out there in the\
      dark.\
\
      His philosophy left him; and surly anger took its place. Her\
      conduct was immoral, inexcusable, worthy of any punishment within\
      his power. He desired no one but her, and she refused him!\
\
      She must really hate him, then! He had never believed it yet. He\
      did not believe it now. It seemed to him incredible. He felt as\
      though he had lost for ever his power of judgment. If she, so\
      soft and yielding as he had always judged her, could take this\
      decided step\'97what could not happen?\
\
      Then he asked himself again if she were carrying on an intrigue\
      with Bosinney. He did not believe that she was; he could not\
      afford to believe such a reason for her conduct\'97the thought was\
      not to be faced.\
\
      It would be unbearable to contemplate the necessity of making his\
      marital relations public property. Short of the most convincing\
      proofs he must still refuse to believe, for he did not wish to\
      punish himself. And all the time at heart\'97he _did_ believe.\
\
      The moonlight cast a greyish tinge over his figure, hunched\
      against the staircase wall.\
\
      Bosinney was in love with her! He hated the fellow, and would not\
      spare him now. He could and would refuse to pay a penny piece\
      over twelve thousand and fifty pounds\'97the extreme limit fixed in\
      the correspondence; or rather he would pay, he would pay and sue\
      him for damages. He would go to Jobling and Boulter and put the\
      matter in their hands. He would ruin the impecunious beggar! And\
      suddenly\'97though what connection between the thoughts?\'97he\
      reflected that Irene had no money either. They were both beggars.\
      This gave him a strange satisfaction.\
\
      The silence was broken by a faint creaking through the wall. She\
      was going to bed at last. Ah! Joy and pleasant dreams! If she\
      threw the door open wide he would not go in now!\
\
      But his lips, that were twisted in a bitter smile, twitched; he\
      covered his eyes with his hands....\
\
      It was late the following afternoon when Soames stood in the\
      dining-room window gazing gloomily into the Square.\
\
      The sunlight still showered on the plane-trees, and in the breeze\
      their gay broad leaves shone and swung in rhyme to a barrel organ\
      at the corner. It was playing a waltz, an old waltz that was out\
      of fashion, with a fateful rhythm in the notes; and it went on\
      and on, though nothing indeed but leaves danced to the tune.\
\
      The woman did not look too gay, for she was tired; and from the\
      tall houses no one threw her down coppers. She moved the organ\
      on, and three doors off began again.\
\
      It was the waltz they had played at Roger\'92s when Irene had danced\
      with Bosinney; and the perfume of the gardenias she had worn came\
      back to Soames, drifted by the malicious music, as it had been\
      drifted to him then, when she passed, her hair glistening, her\
      eyes so soft, drawing Bosinney on and on down an endless\
      ballroom.\
\
      The organ woman plied her handle slowly; she had been grinding\
      her tune all day\'97grinding it in Sloane Street hard by, grinding\
      it perhaps to Bosinney himself.\
\
      Soames turned, took a cigarette from the carven box, and walked\
      back to the window. The tune had mesmerized him, and there came\
      into his view Irene, her sunshade furled, hastening homewards\
      down the Square, in a soft, rose-coloured blouse with drooping\
      sleeves, that he did not know. She stopped before the organ, took\
      out her purse, and gave the woman money.\
\
      Soames shrank back and stood where he could see into the hall.\
\
      She came in with her latch-key, put down her sunshade, and stood\
      looking at herself in the glass. Her cheeks were flushed as if\
      the sun had burned them; her lips were parted in a smile. She\
      stretched her arms out as though to embrace herself, with a laugh\
      that for all the world was like a sob.\
\
      Soames stepped forward.\
\
      \'93Very-pretty!\'94 he said.\
\
      But as though shot she spun round, and would have passed him up\
      the stairs. He barred the way.\
\
      \'93Why such a hurry?\'94 he said, and his eyes fastened on a curl of\
      hair fallen loose across her ear....\
\
      He hardly recognised her. She seemed on fire, so deep and rich\
      the colour of her cheeks, her eyes, her lips, and of the unusual\
      blouse she wore.\
\
      She put up her hand and smoothed back the curl. She was breathing\
      fast and deep, as though she had been running, and with every\
      breath perfume seemed to come from her hair, and from her body,\
      like perfume from an opening flower.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t like that blouse,\'94 he said slowly, \'93it\'92s a soft,\
      shapeless thing!\'94\
\
      He lifted his finger towards her breast, but she dashed his hand\
      aside.\
\
      \'93Don\'92t touch me!\'94 she cried.\
\
      He caught her wrist; she wrenched it away.\
\
      \'93And where may you have been?\'94 he asked.\
\
      \'93In heaven\'97out of this house!\'94 With those words she fled\
      upstairs.\
\
      Outside\'97in thanksgiving\'97at the very door, the organ-grinder was\
      playing the waltz.\
\
      And Soames stood motionless. What prevented him from following\
      her?\
\
      Was it that, with the eyes of faith, he saw Bosinney looking down\
      from that high window in Sloane Street, straining his eyes for\
      yet another glimpse of Irene\'92s vanished figure, cooling his\
      flushed face, dreaming of the moment when she flung herself on\
      his breast\'97the scent of her still in the air around, and the\
      sound of her laugh that was like a sob?\
\
\
      PART III\
\
\
      CHAPTER I MRS. MACANDER\'92S EVIDENCE\
\
      Many people, no doubt, including the editor of the \'93Ultra\
      Vivisectionist,\'94 then in the bloom of its first youth, would say\
      that Soames was less than a man not to have removed the locks\
      from his wife\'92s doors, and, after beating her soundly, resumed\
      wedded happiness.\
\
      Brutality is not so deplorably diluted by humaneness as it used\
      to be, yet a sentimental segment of the population may still be\
      relieved to learn that he did none of these things. For active\
      brutality is not popular with Forsytes; they are too circumspect,\
      and, on the whole, too softhearted. And in Soames there was some\
      common pride, not sufficient to make him do a really generous\
      action, but enough to prevent his indulging in an extremely mean\
      one, except, perhaps, in very hot blood. Above all this a true\
      Forsyte refused to feel himself ridiculous. Short of actually\
      beating his wife, he perceived nothing to be done; he therefore\
      accepted the situation without another word.\
\
      Throughout the summer and autumn he continued to go to the\
      office, to sort his pictures, and ask his friends to dinner.\
\
      He did not leave town; Irene refused to go away. The house at\
      Robin Hill, finished though it was, remained empty and ownerless.\
      Soames had brought a suit against the Buccaneer, in which he\
      claimed from him the sum of three hundred and fifty pounds.\
\
      A firm of solicitors, Messrs. Freak and Able, had put in a\
      defence on Bosinney\'92s behalf. Admitting the facts, they raised a\
      point on the correspondence which, divested of legal phraseology,\
      amounted to this: To speak of \'93a _free_ hand in the terms of this\
      correspondence\'94 is an Irish bull.\
\
      By a chance, fortuitous but not improbable in the close borough\
      of legal circles, a good deal of information came to Soames\'92s ear\
      anent this line of policy, the working partner in his firm,\
      Bustard, happening to sit next at dinner at Walmisley\'92s, the\
      Taxing Master, to young Chankery, of the Common Law Bar.\
\
      The necessity for talking what is known as \'93shop,\'94 which comes on\
      all lawyers with the removal of the ladies, caused Chankery, a\
      young and promising advocate, to propound an impersonal conundrum\
      to his neighbour, whose name he did not know, for, seated as he\
      permanently was in the background, Bustard had practically no\
      name.\
\
      He had, said Chankery, a case coming on with a \'93very nice point.\'94\
      He then explained, preserving every professional discretion, the\
      riddle in Soames\'92s case. Everyone, he said, to whom he had\
      spoken, thought it a nice point. The issue was small\
      unfortunately, \'93though d\'97\'97d serious for his client he\
      believed\'94\'97Walmisley\'92s champagne was bad but plentiful. A Judge\
      would make short work of it, he was afraid. He intended to make a\
      big effort\'97the point was a nice one. What did his neighbour say?\
\
      Bustard, a model of secrecy, said nothing. He related the\
      incident to Soames however with some malice, for this quiet man\
      was capable of human feeling, ending with his own opinion that\
      the point _was_ \'93a very nice one.\'94\
\
      In accordance with his resolve, our Forsyte had put his interests\
      into the hands of Jobling and Boulter. From the moment of doing\
      so he regretted that he had not acted for himself. On receiving a\
      copy of Bosinney\'92s defence he went over to their offices.\
\
      Boulter, who had the matter in hand, Jobling having died some\
      years before, told him that in his opinion it was rather a nice\
      point; he would like counsel\'92s opinion on it.\
\
      Soames told him to go to a good man, and they went to Waterbuck,\
      Q.C., marking him ten and one, who kept the papers six weeks and\
      then wrote as follows:\
\
      \'93In my opinion the true interpretation of this correspondence\
      depends very much on the intention of the parties, and will turn\
      upon the evidence given at the trial. I am of opinion that an\
      attempt should be made to secure from the architect an admission\
      that he understood he was not to spend at the outside more than\
      twelve thousand and fifty pounds. With regard to the expression,\
      \'91a free hand in the terms of this correspondence,\'92 to which my\
      attention is directed, the point is a nice one; but I am of\
      opinion that upon the whole the ruling in \'91Boileau _v_. The\
      Blasted Cement Co., Ltd.,\'92 will apply.\'94\
\
      Upon this opinion they acted, administering interrogatories, but\
      to their annoyance Messrs. Freak and Able answered these in so\
      masterly a fashion that nothing whatever was admitted and that\
      without prejudice.\
\
      It was on October 1 that Soames read Waterbuck\'92s opinion, in the\
      dining-room before dinner.\
\
      It made him nervous; not so much because of the case of \'93Boileau\
      _v_. The Blasted Cement Co., Ltd.,\'94 as that the point had lately\
      begun to seem to him, too, a nice one; there was about it just\
      that pleasant flavour of subtlety so attractive to the best legal\
      appetites. To have his own impression confirmed by Waterbuck,\
      Q.C., would have disturbed any man.\
\
      He sat thinking it over, and staring at the empty grate, for\
      though autumn had come, the weather kept as gloriously fine that\
      jubilee year as if it were still high August. It was not pleasant\
      to be disturbed; he desired too passionately to set his foot on\
      Bosinney\'92s neck.\
\
      Though he had not seen the architect since the last afternoon at\
      Robin Hill, he was never free from the sense of his\
      presence\'97never free from the memory of his worn face with its\
      high cheek bones and enthusiastic eyes. It would not be too much\
      to say that he had never got rid of the feeling of that night\
      when he heard the peacock\'92s cry at dawn\'97the feeling that Bosinney\
      haunted the house. And every man\'92s shape that he saw in the dark\
      evenings walking past, seemed that of him whom George had so\
      appropriately named the Buccaneer.\
\
      Irene still met him, he was certain; where, or how, he neither\
      knew, nor asked; deterred by a vague and secret dread of too much\
      knowledge. It all seemed subterranean nowadays.\
\
      Sometimes when he questioned his wife as to where she had been,\
      which he still made a point of doing, as every Forsyte should,\
      she looked very strange. Her self-possession was wonderful, but\
      there were moments when, behind the mask of her face, inscrutable\
      as it had always been to him, lurked an expression he had never\
      been used to see there.\
\
      She had taken to lunching out too; when he asked Bilson if her\
      mistress had been in to lunch, as often as not she would answer:\
      \'93No, sir.\'94\
\
      He strongly disapproved of her gadding about by herself, and told\
      her so. But she took no notice. There was something that angered,\
      amazed, yet almost amused him about the calm way in which she\
      disregarded his wishes. It was really as if she were hugging to\
      herself the thought of a triumph over him.\
\
      He rose from the perusal of Waterbuck, Q.C.\'92s opinion, and, going\
      upstairs, entered her room, for she did not lock her doors till\
      bed-time\'97she had the decency, he found, to save the feelings of\
      the servants. She was brushing her hair, and turned to him with\
      strange fierceness.\
\
      \'93What do you want?\'94 she said. \'93Please leave my room!\'94\
\
      He answered: \'93I want to know how long this state of things\
      between us is to last? I have put up with it long enough.\'94\
\
      \'93Will you please leave my room?\'94\
\
      \'93Will you treat me as your husband?\'94\
\
      \'93No.\'94\
\
      \'93Then, I shall take steps to make you.\'94\
\
      \'93Do!\'94\
\
      He stared, amazed at the calmness of her answer. Her lips were\
      compressed in a thin line; her hair lay in fluffy masses on her\
      bare shoulders, in all its strange golden contrast to her dark\
      eyes\'97those eyes alive with the emotions of fear, hate, contempt,\
      and odd, haunting triumph.\
\
      \'93Now, please, will you leave my room?\'94 He turned round, and went\
      sulkily out.\
\
      He knew very well that he had no intention of taking steps, and\
      he saw that she knew too\'97knew that he was afraid to.\
\
      It was a habit with him to tell her the doings of his day: how\
      such and such clients had called; how he had arranged a mortgage\
      for Parkes; how that long-standing suit of Fryer _v_. Forsyte was\
      getting on, which, arising in the preternaturally careful\
      disposition of his property by his great uncle Nicholas, who had\
      tied it up so that no one could get at it at all, seemed likely\
      to remain a source of income for several solicitors till the Day\
      of Judgment.\
\
      And how he had called in at Jobson\'92s, and seen a Boucher sold,\
      which he had just missed buying of Talleyrand and Sons in Pall\
      Mall.\
\
      He had an admiration for Boucher, Watteau, and all that school.\
      It was a habit with him to tell her all these matters, and he\
      continued to do it even now, talking for long spells at dinner,\
      as though by the volubility of words he could conceal from\
      himself the ache in his heart.\
\
      Often, if they were alone, he made an attempt to kiss her when\
      she said good-night. He may have had some vague notion that some\
      night she would let him; or perhaps only the feeling that a\
      husband ought to kiss his wife. Even if she hated him, he at all\
      events ought not to put himself in the wrong by neglecting this\
      ancient rite.\
\
      And why did she hate him? Even now he could not altogether\
      believe it. It was strange to be hated!\'97the emotion was too\
      extreme; yet he hated Bosinney, that Buccaneer, that prowling\
      vagabond, that night-wanderer. For in his thoughts Soames always\
      saw him lying in wait\'97wandering. Ah, but he must be in very low\
      water! Young Burkitt, the architect, had seen him coming out of a\
      third-rate restaurant, looking terribly down in the mouth!\
\
      During all the hours he lay awake, thinking over the situation,\
      which seemed to have no end\'97unless she should suddenly come to\
      her senses\'97never once did the thought of separating from his wife\
      seriously enter his head....\
\
      And the Forsytes! What part did they play in this stage of\
      Soames\'92s subterranean tragedy?\
\
      Truth to say, little or none, for they were at the sea.\
\
      From hotels, hydropathics, or lodging-houses, they were bathing\
      daily; laying in a stock of ozone to last them through the\
      winter.\
\
      Each section, in the vineyard of its own choosing, grew and\
      culled and pressed and bottled the grapes of a pet sea-air.\
\
      The end of September began to witness their several returns.\
\
      In rude health and small omnibuses, with considerable colour in\
      their cheeks, they arrived daily from the various termini. The\
      following morning saw them back at their vocations.\
\
      On the next Sunday Timothy\'92s was thronged from lunch till dinner.\
\
      Amongst other gossip, too numerous and interesting to relate,\
      Mrs. Septimus Small mentioned that Soames and Irene had not been\
      away.\
\
      It remained for a comparative outsider to supply the next\
      evidence of interest.\
\
      It chanced that one afternoon late in September, Mrs. MacAnder,\
      Winifred Dartie\'92s greatest friend, taking a constitutional, with\
      young Augustus Flippard, on her bicycle in Richmond Park, passed\
      Irene and Bosinney walking from the bracken towards the Sheen\
      Gate.\
\
      Perhaps the poor little woman was thirsty, for she had ridden\
      long on a hard, dry road, and, as all London knows, to ride a\
      bicycle and talk to young Flippard will try the toughest\
      constitution; or perhaps the sight of the cool bracken grove,\
      whence \'93those two\'94 were coming down, excited her envy. The cool\
      bracken grove on the top of the hill, with the oak boughs for\
      roof, where the pigeons were raising an endless wedding hymn, and\
      the autumn, humming, whispered to the ears of lovers in the fern,\
      while the deer stole by. The bracken grove of irretrievable\
      delights, of golden minutes in the long marriage of heaven and\
      earth! The bracken grove, sacred to stags, to strange tree-stump\
      fauns leaping around the silver whiteness of a birch-tree nymph\
      at summer dusk.\
\
      This lady knew all the Forsytes, and having been at Jun\'92s \'93at\
      home,\'94 was not at a loss to see with whom she had to deal. Her\
      own marriage, poor thing, had not been successful, but having had\
      the good sense and ability to force her husband into pronounced\
      error, she herself had passed through the necessary divorce\
      proceedings without incurring censure.\
\
      She was therefore a judge of all that sort of thing, and lived in\
      one of those large buildings, where in small sets of apartments,\
      are gathered incredible quantities of Forsytes, whose chief\
      recreation out of business hours is the discussion of each\
      other\'92s affairs.\
\
      Poor little woman, perhaps she was thirsty, certainly she was\
      bored, for Flippard was a wit. To see \'93those two\'94 in so unlikely\
      a spot was quite a merciful \'93pick-me-up.\'94\
\
      At the MacAnder, like all London, Time pauses.\
\
      This small but remarkable woman merits attention; her all-seeing\
      eye and shrewd tongue were inscrutably the means of furthering\
      the ends of Providence.\
\
      With an air of being in at the death, she had an almost\
      distressing power of taking care of herself. She had done more,\
      perhaps, in her way than any woman about town to destroy the\
      sense of chivalry which still clogs the wheel of civilization. So\
      smart she was, and spoken of endearingly as \'93the little\
      MacAnder!\'94\
\
      Dressing tightly and well, she belonged to a Woman\'92s Club, but\
      was by no means the neurotic and dismal type of member who was\
      always thinking of her rights. She took her rights unconsciously,\
      they came natural to her, and she knew exactly how to make the\
      most of them without exciting anything but admiration amongst\
      that great class to whom she was affiliated, not precisely\
      perhaps by manner, but by birth, breeding, and the true, the\
      secret gauge, a sense of property.\
\
      The daughter of a Bedfordshire solicitor, by the daughter of a\
      clergyman, she had never, through all the painful experience of\
      being married to a very mild painter with a cranky love of\
      Nature, who had deserted her for an actress, lost touch with the\
      requirements, beliefs, and inner feeling of Society; and, on\
      attaining her liberty, she placed herself without effort in the\
      very van of Forsyteism.\
\
      Always in good spirits, and \'93full of information,\'94 she was\
      universally welcomed. She excited neither surprise nor\
      disapprobation when encountered on the Rhine or at Zermatt,\
      either alone, or travelling with a lady and two gentlemen; it was\
      felt that she was perfectly capable of taking care of herself;\
      and the hearts of all Forsytes warmed to that wonderful instinct,\
      which enabled her to enjoy everything without giving anything\
      away. It was generally felt that to such women as Mrs. MacAnder\
      should we look for the perpetuation and increase of our best type\
      of woman. She had never had any children.\
\
      If there was one thing more than another that she could not stand\
      it was one of those soft women with what men called \'93charm\'94 about\
      them, and for Mrs. Soames she always had an especial dislike.\
\
      Obscurely, no doubt, she felt that if charm were once admitted as\
      the criterion, smartness and capability must go to the wall; and\
      she hated\'97with a hatred the deeper that at times this so-called\
      charm seemed to disturb all calculations\'97the subtle seductiveness\
      which she could not altogether overlook in Irene.\
\
      She said, however, that she could see nothing in the woman\'97there\
      was no \'93go\'94 about her\'97she would never be able to stand up for\
      herself\'97anyone could take advantage of her, that was plain\'97she\
      could not see in fact what men found to admire!\
\
      She was not really ill-natured, but, in maintaining her position\
      after the trying circumstances of her married life, she had found\
      it so necessary to be \'93full of information,\'94 that the idea of\
      holding her tongue about \'93those two\'94 in the Park never occurred\
      to her.\
\
      And it so happened that she was dining that very evening at\
      Timothy\'92s, where she went sometimes to \'93cheer the old things up,\'94\
      as she was wont to put it. The same people were always asked to\
      meet her: Winifred Dartie and her husband; Francie, because she\
      belonged to the artistic circles, for Mrs. MacAnder was known to\
      contribute articles on dress to \'93The Ladies Kingdom Come\'94. and\
      for her to flirt with, provided they could be obtained, two of\
      the Hayman boys, who, though they never said anything, were\
      believed to be fast and thoroughly intimate with all that was\
      latest in smart Society.\
\
      At twenty-five minutes past seven she turned out the electric\
      light in her little hall, and wrapped in her opera cloak with the\
      chinchilla collar, came out into the corridor, pausing a moment\
      to make sure she had her latch-key. These little self-contained\
      flats were convenient; to be sure, she had no light and no air,\
      but she could shut it up whenever she liked and go away. There\
      was no bother with servants, and she never felt tied as she used\
      to when poor, dear Fred was always about, in his mooney way. She\
      retained no rancour against poor, dear Fred, he was such a fool;\
      but the thought of that actress drew from her, even now, a\
      little, bitter, derisive smile.\
\
      Firmly snapping the door to, she crossed the corridor, with its\
      gloomy, yellow-ochre walls, and its infinite vista of brown,\
      numbered doors. The lift was going down; and wrapped to the ears\
      in the high cloak, with every one of her auburn hairs in its\
      place, she waited motionless for it to stop at her floor. The\
      iron gates clanked open; she entered. There were already three\
      occupants, a man in a great white waistcoat, with a large, smooth\
      face like a baby\'92s, and two old ladies in black, with mittened\
      hands.\
\
      Mrs. MacAnder smiled at them; she knew everybody; and all these\
      three, who had been admirably silent before, began to talk at\
      once. This was Mrs. MacAnder\'92s successful secret. She provoked\
      conversation.\
\
      Throughout a descent of five stories the conversation continued,\
      the lift boy standing with his back turned, his cynical face\
      protruding through the bars.\
\
      At the bottom they separated, the man in the white waistcoat\
      sentimentally to the billiard room, the old ladies to dine and\
      say to each other: \'93A dear little woman!\'94 \'93Such a rattle!\'94 and\
      Mrs. MacAnder to her cab.\
\
      When Mrs. MacAnder dined at Timothy\'92s, the conversation (although\
      Timothy himself could never be induced to be present) took that\
      wider, man-of-the-world tone current among Forsytes at large, and\
      this, no doubt, was what put her at a premium there.\
\
      Mrs. Small and Aunt Hester found it an exhilarating change. \'93If\
      only,\'94 they said, \'93Timothy would meet her!\'94 It was felt that she\
      would do him good. She could tell you, for instance, the latest\
      story of Sir Charles Fiste\'92s son at Monte Carlo; who was the real\
      heroine of Tynemouth Eddy\'92s fashionable novel that everyone was\
      holding up their hands over, and what they were doing in Paris\
      about wearing bloomers. She was so sensible, too, knowing all\
      about that vexed question, whether to send young Nicholas\'92 eldest\
      into the navy as his mother wished, or make him an accountant as\
      his father thought would be safer. She strongly deprecated the\
      navy. If you were not exceptionally brilliant or exceptionally\
      well connected, they passed you over so disgracefully, and what\
      was it after all to look forward to, even if you became an\
      admiral\'97a pittance! An accountant had many more chances, but let\
      him be put with a good firm, where there was no risk at starting!\
\
      Sometimes she would give them a tip on the Stock Exchange; not\
      that Mrs. Small or Aunt Hester ever took it. They had indeed no\
      money to invest; but it seemed to bring them into such exciting\
      touch with the realities of life. It was an event. They would ask\
      Timothy, they said. But they never did, knowing in advance that\
      it would upset him. Surreptitiously, however, for weeks after\
      they would look in that paper, which they took with respect on\
      account of its really fashionable proclivities, to see whether\
      \'93Bright\'92s Rubies\'94 or \'93The Woollen Mackintosh Company\'94 were up or\
      down. Sometimes they could not find the name of the company at\
      all; and they would wait until James or Roger or even Swithin\
      came in, and ask them in voices trembling with curiosity how that\
      \'93Bolivia Lime and Speltrate\'94 was doing\'97they could not find it in\
      the paper.\
\
      And Roger would answer: \'93What do you want to know for? Some\
      trash! You\'92ll go burning your fingers\'97investing your money in\
      lime, and things you know nothing about! Who told you?\'94 and\
      ascertaining what they had been told, he would go away, and,\
      making inquiries in the City, would perhaps invest some of his\
      own money in the concern.\
\
      It was about the middle of dinner, just in fact as the saddle of\
      mutton had been brought in by Smither, that Mrs. MacAnder,\
      looking airily round, said: \'93Oh! and whom do you think I passed\
      to-day in Richmond Park? You\'92ll never guess\'97Mrs. Soames and\'97Mr.\
      Bosinney. They must have been down to look at the house!\'94\
\
      Winifred Dartie coughed, and no one said a word. It was the piece\
      of evidence they had all unconsciously been waiting for.\
\
      To do Mrs. MacAnder justice, she had been to Switzerland and the\
      Italian lakes with a party of three, and had not heard of\
      Soames\'92s rupture with his architect. She could not tell,\
      therefore, the profound impression her words would make.\
\
      Upright and a little flushed, she moved her small, shrewd eyes\
      from face to face, trying to gauge the effect of her words. On\
      either side of her a Hayman boy, his lean, taciturn, hungry face\
      turned towards his plate, ate his mutton steadily.\
\
      These two, Giles and Jesse, were so alike and so inseparable that\
      they were known as the Dromios. They never talked, and seemed\
      always completely occupied in doing nothing. It was popularly\
      supposed that they were cramming for an important examination.\
      They walked without hats for long hours in the Gardens attached\
      to their house, books in their hands, a fox-terrier at their\
      heels, never saying a word, and smoking all the time. Every\
      morning, about fifty yards apart, they trotted down Campden Hill\
      on two lean hacks, with legs as long as their own, and every\
      morning about an hour later, still fifty yards apart, they\
      cantered up again. Every evening, wherever they had dined, they\
      might be observed about half-past ten, leaning over the\
      balustrade of the Alhambra promenade.\
\
      They were never seen otherwise than together; in this way passing\
      their lives, apparently perfectly content.\
\
      Inspired by some dumb stirring within them of the feelings of\
      gentlemen, they turned at this painful moment to Mrs. MacAnder,\
      and said in precisely the same voice: \'93Have you seen the...?\'94\
\
      Such was her surprise at being thus addressed that she put down\
      her fork; and Smither, who was passing, promptly removed her\
      plate. Mrs. MacAnder, however, with presence of mind, said\
      instantly: \'93I must have a little more of that nice mutton.\'94\
\
      But afterwards in the drawing\'97room she sat down by Mrs. Small,\
      determined to get to the bottom of the matter. And she began:\
\
      \'93What a charming woman, Mrs. Soames; such a sympathetic\
      temperament! Soames is a really lucky man!\'94\
\
      Her anxiety for information had not made sufficient allowance for\
      that inner Forsyte skin which refuses to share its troubles with\
      outsiders.\
\
      Mrs. Septimus Small, drawing herself up with a creak and rustle\
      of her whole person, said, shivering in her dignity:\
\
      \'93My dear, it is a subject we do not talk about!\'94\
\
\
      CHAPTER II NIGHT IN THE PARK\
\
      Although with her infallible instinct Mrs. Small had said the\
      very thing to make her guest \'93more intriguee than ever,\'94 it is\
      difficult to see how else she could truthfully have spoken.\
\
      It was not a subject which the Forsytes could talk about even\
      among themselves\'97to use the word Soames had invented to\
      characterize to himself the situation, it was \'93subterranean.\'94\
\
      Yet, within a week of Mrs. MacAnder\'92s encounter in Richmond Park,\
      to all of them\'97save Timothy, from whom it was carefully kept\'97to\
      James on his domestic beat from the Poultry to Park Lane, to\
      George the wild one, on his daily adventure from the bow window\
      at the Haversnake to the billiard room at the \'93Red Pottle,\'94 was\
      it known that \'93those two\'94 had gone to extremes.\
\
      George (it was he who invented many of those striking expressions\
      still current in fashionable circles) voiced the sentiment more\
      accurately than any one when he said to his brother Eustace that\
      \'93the Buccaneer\'94 was \'93going it\'94. he expected Soames was about \'93fed\
      up.\'94\
\
      It was felt that he must be, and yet, what could be done? He\
      ought perhaps to take steps; but to take steps would be\
      deplorable.\
\
      Without an open scandal which they could not see their way to\
      recommending, it was difficult to see what steps could be taken.\
      In this impasse, the only thing was to say nothing to Soames, and\
      nothing to each other; in fact, to pass it over.\
\
      By displaying towards Irene a dignified coldness, some impression\
      might be made upon her; but she was seldom now to be seen, and\
      there seemed a slight difficulty in seeking her out on purpose to\
      show her coldness. Sometimes in the privacy of his bedroom James\
      would reveal to Emily the real suffering that his son\'92s\
      misfortune caused him.\
\
      \'93_I_ can\'92t tell,\'94 he would say; \'93it worries me out of my life.\
      There\'92ll be a scandal, and that\'92ll do him no good. I shan\'92t say\
      anything to him. There might be nothing in it. What do you think?\
      She\'92s very artistic, they tell me. What? Oh, you\'92re a \'91regular\
      Juley\'92! Well, I don\'92t know; I expect the worst. This is what\
      comes of having no children. I knew how it would be from the\
      first. They never told me they didn\'92t mean to have any\
      children\'97nobody tells me anything!\'94\
\
      On his knees by the side of the bed, his eyes open and fixed with\
      worry, he would breathe into the counterpane. Clad in his\
      nightshirt, his neck poked forward, his back rounded, he\
      resembled some long white bird.\
\
      \'93Our Father\'97,\'94 he repeated, turning over and over again the\
      thought of this possible scandal.\
\
      Like old Jolyon, he, too, at the bottom of his heart set the\
      blame of the tragedy down to family interference. What business\
      had that lot\'97he began to think of the Stanhope Gate branch,\
      including young Jolyon and his daughter, as \'93that lot\'94\'97to\
      introduce a person like this Bosinney into the family? (He had\
      heard George\'92s soubriquet, \'93The Buccaneer,\'94 but he could make\
      nothing of that\'97the young man was an architect.)\
\
      He began to feel that his brother Jolyon, to whom he had always\
      looked up and on whose opinion he had relied, was not quite what\
      he had expected.\
\
      Not having his eldest brother\'92s force of character, he was more\
      sad than angry. His great comfort was to go to Winifred\'92s, and\
      take the little Darties in his carriage over to Kensington\
      Gardens, and there, by the Round Pond, he could often be seen\
      walking with his eyes fixed anxiously on little Publius Dartie\'92s\
      sailing-boat, which he had himself freighted with a penny, as\
      though convinced that it would never again come to shore; while\
      little Publius\'97who, James delighted to say, was not a bit like\
      his father skipping along under his lee, would try to get him to\
      bet another that it never would, having found that it always did.\
      And James would make the bet; he always paid\'97sometimes as many as\
      three or four pennies in the afternoon, for the game seemed never\
      to pall on little Publius\'97and always in paying he said: \'93Now,\
      that\'92s for your money-box. Why, you\'92re getting quite a rich man!\'94\
      The thought of his little grandson\'92s growing wealth was a real\
      pleasure to him. But little Publius knew a sweet-shop, and a\
      trick worth two of that.\
\
      And they would walk home across the Park, James\'92 figure, with\
      high shoulders and absorbed and worried face, exercising its\
      tall, lean protectorship, pathetically unregarded, over the\
      robust child-figures of Imogen and little Publius.\
\
      But those Gardens and that Park were not sacred to James.\
      Forsytes and tramps, children and lovers, rested and wandered day\
      after day, night after night, seeking one and all some freedom\
      from labour, from the reek and turmoil of the streets.\
\
      The leaves browned slowly, lingering with the sun and summer-like\
      warmth of the nights.\
\
      On Saturday, October 5, the sky that had been blue all day\
      deepened after sunset to the bloom of purple grapes. There was no\
      moon, and a clear dark, like some velvety garment, was wrapped\
      around the trees, whose thinned branches, resembling plumes,\
      stirred not in the still, warm air. All London had poured into\
      the Park, draining the cup of summer to its dregs.\
\
      Couple after couple, from every gate, they streamed along the\
      paths and over the burnt grass, and one after another, silently\
      out of the lighted spaces, stole into the shelter of the feathery\
      trees, where, blotted against some trunk, or under the shadow of\
      shrubs, they were lost to all but themselves in the heart of the\
      soft darkness.\
\
      To fresh-comers along the paths, these forerunners formed but\
      part of that passionate dusk, whence only a strange murmur, like\
      the confused beating of hearts, came forth. But when that murmur\
      reached each couple in the lamp-light their voices wavered, and\
      ceased; their arms enlaced, their eyes began seeking, searching,\
      probing the blackness. Suddenly, as though drawn by invisible\
      hands, they, too, stepped over the railing, and, silent as\
      shadows, were gone from the light.\
\
      The stillness, enclosed in the far, inexorable roar of the town,\
      was alive with the myriad passions, hopes, and loves of\
      multitudes of struggling human atoms; for in spite of the\
      disapproval of that great body of Forsytes, the Municipal\
      Council\'97to whom Love had long been considered, next to the Sewage\
      Question, the gravest danger to the community\'97a process was going\
      on that night in the Park, and in a hundred other parks, without\
      which the thousand factories, churches, shops, taxes, and drains,\
      of which they were custodians, were as arteries without blood, a\
      man without a heart.\
\
      The instincts of self-forgetfulness, of passion, and of love,\
      hiding under the trees, away from the trustees of their\
      remorseless enemy, the \'93sense of property,\'94 were holding a\
      stealthy revel, and Soames, returning from Bayswater\'97for he had\
      been alone to dine at Timothy\'92s walking home along the water,\
      with his mind upon that coming lawsuit, had the blood driven from\
      his heart by a low laugh and the sound of kisses. He thought of\
      writing to _The Times_ the next morning, to draw the attention of\
      the Editor to the condition of our parks. He did not, however,\
      for he had a horror of seeing his name in print.\
\
      But starved as he was, the whispered sounds in the stillness, the\
      half-seen forms in the dark, acted on him like some morbid\
      stimulant. He left the path along the water and stole under the\
      trees, along the deep shadow of little plantations, where the\
      boughs of chestnut trees hung their great leaves low, and there\
      was blacker refuge, shaping his course in circles which had for\
      their object a stealthy inspection of chairs side by side,\
      against tree-trunks, of enlaced lovers, who stirred at his\
      approach.\
\
      Now he stood still on the rise overlooking the Serpentine, where,\
      in full lamp-light, black against the silver water, sat a couple\
      who never moved, the woman\'92s face buried on the man\'92s neck\'97a\
      single form, like a carved emblem of passion, silent and\
      unashamed.\
\
      And, stung by the sight, Soames hurried on deeper into the shadow\
      of the trees.\
\
      In this search, who knows what he thought and what he sought?\
      Bread for hunger\'97light in darkness? Who knows what he expected to\
      find\'97impersonal knowledge of the human heart\'97the end of his\
      private subterranean tragedy\'97for, again, who knew, but that each\
      dark couple, unnamed, unnameable, might not be he and she?\
\
      But it could not be such knowledge as this that he was\
      seeking\'97the wife of Soames Forsyte sitting in the Park like a\
      common wench! Such thoughts were inconceivable; and from tree to\
      tree, with his noiseless step, he passed.\
\
      Once he was sworn at; once the whisper, \'93If only it could always\
      be like this!\'94 sent the blood flying again from his heart, and he\
      waited there, patient and dogged, for the two to move. But it was\
      only a poor thin slip of a shop-girl in her draggled blouse who\
      passed him, clinging to her lover\'92s arm.\
\
      A hundred other lovers too whispered that hope in the stillness\
      of the trees, a hundred other lovers clung to each other.\
\
      But shaking himself with sudden disgust, Soames returned to the\
      path, and left that seeking for he knew not what.\
\
\
      CHAPTER III MEETING AT THE BOTANICAL\
\
      Young Jolyon, whose circumstances were not those of a Forsyte,\
      found at times a difficulty in sparing the money needful for\
      those country jaunts and researches into Nature, without having\
      prosecuted which no watercolour artist ever puts brush to paper.\
\
      He was frequently, in fact, obliged to take his colour-box into\
      the Botanical Gardens, and there, on his stool, in the shade of a\
      monkey-puzzler or in the lee of some India-rubber plant, he would\
      spend long hours sketching.\
\
      An Art critic who had recently been looking at his work had\
      delivered himself as follows:\
\
      \'93In a way your drawings are very good; tone and colour, in some\
      of them certainly quite a feeling for Nature. But, you see,\
      they\'92re so scattered; you\'92ll never get the public to look at\
      them. Now, if you\'92d taken a definite subject, such as \'91London by\
      Night,\'92 or \'91The Crystal Palace in the Spring,\'92 and made a regular\
      series, the public would have known at once what they were\
      looking at. I can\'92t lay too much stress upon that. All the men\
      who are making great names in Art, like Crum Stone or Bleeder,\
      are making them by avoiding the unexpected; by specializing and\
      putting their works all in the same pigeon-hole, so that the\
      public know at once where to go. And this stands to reason, for\
      if a man\'92s a collector he doesn\'92t want people to smell at the\
      canvas to find out whom his pictures are by; he wants them to be\
      able to say at once, \'91A capital Forsyte!\'92 It is all the more\
      important for you to be careful to choose a subject that they can\
      lay hold of on the spot, since there\'92s no very marked originality\
      in your style.\'94\
\
      Young Jolyon, standing by the little piano, where a bowl of dried\
      rose leaves, the only produce of the garden, was deposited on a\
      bit of faded damask, listened with his dim smile.\
\
      Turning to his wife, who was looking at the speaker with an angry\
      expression on her thin face, he said:\
\
      \'93You see, dear?\'94\
\
      \'93I do _not_,\'94 she answered in her staccato voice, that still had\
      a little foreign accent; \'93your style _has_ originality.\'94\
\
      The critic looked at her, smiled\'92 deferentially, and said no\
      more. Like everyone else, he knew their history.\
\
      The words bore good fruit with young Jolyon; they were contrary\
      to all that he believed in, to all that he theoretically held\
      good in his Art, but some strange, deep instinct moved him\
      against his will to turn them to profit.\
\
      He discovered therefore one morning that an idea had come to him\
      for making a series of watercolour drawings of London. How the\
      idea had arisen he could not tell; and it was not till the\
      following year, when he had completed and sold them at a very\
      fair price, that in one of his impersonal moods, he found himself\
      able to recollect the Art critic, and to discover in his own\
      achievement another proof that he was a Forsyte.\
\
      He decided to commence with the Botanical Gardens, where he had\
      already made so many studies, and chose the little artificial\
      pond, sprinkled now with an autumn shower of red and yellow\
      leaves, for though the gardeners longed to sweep them off, they\
      could not reach them with their brooms. The rest of the gardens\
      they swept bare enough, removing every morning Nature\'92s rain of\
      leaves; piling them in heaps, whence from slow fires rose the\
      sweet, acrid smoke that, like the cuckoo\'92s note for spring, the\
      scent of lime trees for the summer, is the true emblem of the\
      fall. The gardeners\'92 tidy souls could not abide the gold and\
      green and russet pattern on the grass. The gravel paths must lie\
      unstained, ordered, methodical, without knowledge of the\
      realities of life, nor of that slow and beautiful decay which\
      flings crowns underfoot to star the earth with fallen glories,\
      whence, as the cycle rolls, will leap again wild spring.\
\
      Thus each leaf that fell was marked from the moment when it\
      fluttered a good-bye and dropped, slow turning, from its twig.\
\
      But on that little pond the leaves floated in peace, and praised\
      Heaven with their hues, the sunlight haunting over them.\
\
      And so young Jolyon found them.\
\
      Coming there one morning in the middle of October, he was\
      disconcerted to find a bench about twenty paces from his stand\
      occupied, for he had a proper horror of anyone seeing him at\
      work.\
\
      A lady in a velvet jacket was sitting there, with her eyes fixed\
      on the ground. A flowering laurel, however, stood between, and,\
      taking shelter behind this, young Jolyon prepared his easel.\
\
      His preparations were leisurely; he caught, as every true artist\
      should, at anything that might delay for a moment the effort of\
      his work, and he found himself looking furtively at this unknown\
      dame.\
\
      Like his father before him, he had an eye for a face. This face\
      was charming!\
\
      He saw a rounded chin nestling in a cream ruffle, a delicate face\
      with large dark eyes and soft lips. A black \'93picture\'94 hat\
      concealed the hair; her figure was lightly poised against the\
      back of the bench, her knees were crossed; the tip of a\
      patent-leather shoe emerged beneath her skirt. There was\
      something, indeed, inexpressibly dainty about the person of this\
      lady, but young Jolyon\'92s attention was chiefly riveted by the\
      look on her face, which reminded him of his wife. It was as\
      though its owner had come into contact with forces too strong for\
      her. It troubled him, arousing vague feelings of attraction and\
      chivalry. Who was she? And what doing there, alone?\
\
      Two young gentlemen of that peculiar breed, at once forward and\
      shy, found in the Regent\'92s Park, came by on their way to lawn\
      tennis, and he noted with disapproval their furtive stares of\
      admiration. A loitering gardener halted to do something\
      unnecessary to a clump of pampas grass; he, too, wanted an excuse\
      for peeping. A gentleman, old, and, by his hat, a professor of\
      horticulture, passed three times to scrutinize her long and\
      stealthily, a queer expression about his lips.\
\
      With all these men young Jolyon felt the same vague irritation.\
      She looked at none of them, yet was he certain that every man who\
      passed would look at her like that.\
\
      Her face was not the face of a sorceress, who in every look holds\
      out to men the offer of pleasure; it had none of the \'93devil\'92s\
      beauty\'94 so highly prized among the first Forsytes of the land;\
      neither was it of that type, no less adorable, associated with\
      the box of chocolate; it was not of the spiritually passionate,\
      or passionately spiritual order, peculiar to house-decoration and\
      modern poetry; nor did it seem to promise to the playwright\
      material for the production of the interesting and neurasthenic\
      figure, who commits suicide in the last act.\
\
      In shape and colouring, in its soft persuasive passivity, its\
      sensuous purity, this woman\'92s face reminded him of Titian\'92s\
      \'93Heavenly Love,\'94 a reproduction of which hung over the sideboard\
      in his dining-room. And her attraction seemed to be in this soft\
      passivity, in the feeling she gave that to pressure she must\
      yield.\
\
      For what or whom was she waiting, in the silence, with the trees\
      dropping here and there a leaf, and the thrushes strutting close\
      on grass, touched with the sparkle of the autumn rime? Then her\
      charming face grew eager, and, glancing round, with almost a\
      lover\'92s jealousy, young Jolyon saw Bosinney striding across the\
      grass.\
\
      Curiously he watched the meeting, the look in their eyes, the\
      long clasp of their hands. They sat down close together, linked\
      for all their outward discretion. He heard the rapid murmur of\
      their talk; but what they said he could not catch.\
\
      He had rowed in the galley himself! He knew the long hours of\
      waiting and the lean minutes of a half-public meeting; the\
      tortures of suspense that haunt the unhallowed lover.\
\
      It required, however, but a glance at their two faces to see that\
      this was none of those affairs of a season that distract men and\
      women about town; none of those sudden appetites that wake up\
      ravening, and are surfeited and asleep again in six weeks. This\
      was the real thing! This was what had happened to himself! Out of\
      this anything might come!\
\
      Bosinney was pleading, and she so quiet, so soft, yet immovable\
      in her passivity, sat looking over the grass.\
\
      Was he the man to carry her off, that tender, passive being, who\
      would never stir a step for herself? Who had given him all\
      herself, and would die for him, but perhaps would never run away\
      with him!\
\
      It seemed to young Jolyon that he could hear her saying: \'93But,\
      darling, it would ruin you!\'94 For he himself had experienced to\
      the full the gnawing fear at the bottom of each woman\'92s heart\
      that she is a drag on the man she loves.\
\
      And he peeped at them no more; but their soft, rapid talk came to\
      his ears, with the stuttering song of some bird who seemed trying\
      to remember the notes of spring: Joy\'97tragedy? Which\'97which?\
\
      And gradually their talk ceased; long silence followed.\
\
      \'93And where does Soames come in?\'94 young Jolyon thought. \'93People\
      think she is concerned about the sin of deceiving her husband!\
      Little they know of women! She\'92s eating, after starvation\'97taking\
      her revenge! And Heaven help her\'97for he\'92ll take his.\'94\
\
      He heard the swish of silk, and, spying round the laurel, saw\
      them walking away, their hands stealthily joined....\
\
      At the end of July old Jolyon had taken his grand-daughter to the\
      mountains; and on that visit (the last they ever paid) June\
      recovered to a great extent her health and spirits. In the\
      hotels, filled with British Forsytes\'97for old Jolyon could not\
      bear a \'93set of Germans,\'94 as he called all foreigners\'97she was\
      looked upon with respect\'97the only grand-daughter of that\
      fine-looking, and evidently wealthy, old Mr. Forsyte. She did not\
      mix freely with people\'97to mix freely with people was not Jun\'92s\
      habit\'97but she formed some friendships, and notably one in the\
      Rhone Valley, with a French girl who was dying of consumption.\
\
      Determining at once that her friend should not die, she forgot,\
      in the institution of a campaign against Death, much of her own\
      trouble.\
\
      Old Jolyon watched the new intimacy with relief and disapproval;\
      for this additional proof that her life was to be passed amongst\
      \'93lame ducks\'94 worried him. Would she never make a friendship or\
      take an interest in something that would be of real benefit to\
      her?\
\
      \'93Taking up with a parcel of foreigners,\'94 he called it. He often,\
      however, brought home grapes or roses, and presented them to\
      \'93Mam\'92zelle\'94 with an ingratiating twinkle.\
\
      Towards the end of September, in spite of Jun\'92s disapproval,\
      Mademoiselle Vigor breathed her last in the little hotel at St.\
      Luc, to which they had moved her; and June took her defeat so\
      deeply to heart that old Jolyon carried her away to Paris. Here,\
      in contemplation of the \'93Venus de Milo\'94 and the \'93Madeleine,\'94 she\
      shook off her depression, and when, towards the middle of\
      October, they returned to town, her grandfather believed that he\
      had effected a cure.\
\
      No sooner, however, had they established themselves in Stanhope\
      Gate than he perceived to his dismay a return of her old absorbed\
      and brooding manner. She would sit, staring in front of her, her\
      chin on her hand, like a little Norse spirit, grim and intent,\
      while all around in the electric light, then just installed,\
      shone the great, drawing-room brocaded up to the frieze, full of\
      furniture from Baple and Pullbred\'92s. And in the huge gilt mirror\
      were reflected those Dresden china groups of young men in tight\
      knee breeches, at the feet of full-bosomed ladies nursing on\
      their laps pet lambs, which old Jolyon had bought when he was a\
      bachelor and thought so highly of in these days of degenerate\
      taste. He was a man of most open mind, who, more than any Forsyte\
      of them all, had moved with the times, but he could never forget\
      that he had bought these groups at Jobson\'92s, and given a lot of\
      money for them. He often said to June, with a sort of\
      disillusioned contempt:\
\
      \'93_You_ don\'92t care about them! They\'92re not the gimcrack things you\
      and your friends like, but they cost me seventy pounds!\'94 He was\
      not a man who allowed his taste to be warped when he knew for\
      solid reasons that it was sound.\
\
      One of the first things that June did on getting home was to go\
      round to Timothy\'92s. She persuaded herself that it was her duty to\
      call there, and cheer him with an account of all her travels; but\
      in reality she went because she knew of no other place where, by\
      some random speech, or roundabout question, she could glean news\
      of Bosinney.\
\
      They received her most cordially: And how was her dear\
      grandfather? He had not been to see them since May. Her Uncle\
      Timothy was very poorly, he had had a lot of trouble with the\
      chimney-sweep in his bedroom; the stupid man had let the soot\
      down the chimney! It had quite upset her uncle.\
\
      June sat there a long time, dreading, yet passionately hoping,\
      that they would speak of Bosinney.\
\
      But paralyzed by unaccountable discretion, Mrs. Septimus Small\
      let fall no word, neither did she question June about him. In\
      desperation the girl asked at last whether Soames and Irene were\
      in town\'97she had not yet been to see anyone.\
\
      It was Aunt Hester who replied: Oh, yes, they were in town, they\
      had not been away at all. There was some little difficulty about\
      the house, she believed. June had heard, no doubt! She had better\
      ask her Aunt Juley!\
\
      June turned to Mrs. Small, who sat upright in her chair, her\
      hands clasped, her face covered with innumerable pouts. In answer\
      to the girl\'92s look she maintained a strange silence, and when she\
      spoke it was to ask June whether she had worn night-socks up in\
      those high hotels where it must be so cold of a night.\
\
      June answered that she had not, she hated the stuffy things; and\
      rose to leave.\
\
      Mrs. Small\'92s infallibly chosen silence was far more ominous to\
      her than anything that could have been said.\
\
      Before half an hour was over she had dragged the truth from Mrs.\
      Baynes in Lowndes Square, that Soames was bringing an action\
      against Bosinney over the decoration of the house.\
\
      Instead of disturbing her, the news had a strangely calming\
      effect; as though she saw in the prospect of this struggle new\
      hope for herself. She learnt that the case was expected to come\
      on in about a month, and there seemed little or no prospect of\
      Bosinney\'92s success.\
\
      \'93And whatever he\'92ll do I can\'92t think,\'94 said Mrs. Baynes; \'93it\'92s\
      very dreadful for him, you know\'97he\'92s got no money\'97he\'92s very hard\
      up. And we can\'92t help him, I\'92m sure. I\'92m told the money-lenders\
      won\'92t lend if you have no security, and he has none\'97none at all.\'94\
\
      Her embonpoint had increased of late; she was in the full swing\
      of autumn organization, her writing-table literally strewn with\
      the menus of charity functions. She looked meaningly at June,\
      with her round eyes of parrot-grey.\
\
      The sudden flush that rose on the girl\'92s intent young face\'97she\
      must have seen spring up before her a great hope\'97the sudden\
      sweetness of her smile, often came back to Lady Baynes in after\
      years (Baynes was knighted when he built that public Museum of\
      Art which has given so much employment to officials, and so\
      little pleasure to those working classes for whom it was\
      designed).\
\
      The memory of that change, vivid and touching, like the breaking\
      open of a flower, or the first sun after long winter, the memory,\
      too, of all that came after, often intruded itself,\
      unaccountably, inopportunely on Lady Baynes, when her mind was\
      set upon the most important things.\
\
      This was the very afternoon of the day that young Jolyon\
      witnessed the meeting in the Botanical Gardens, and on this day,\
      too, old Jolyon paid a visit to his solicitors, Forsyte, Bustard,\
      and Forsyte, in the Poultry. Soames was not in, he had gone down\
      to Somerset House; Bustard was buried up to the hilt in papers\
      and that inaccessible apartment, where he was judiciously placed,\
      in order that he might do as much work as possible; but James was\
      in the front office, biting a finger, and lugubriously turning\
      over the pleadings in Forsyte _v_. Bosinney.\
\
      This sound lawyer had only a sort of luxurious dread of the \'93nice\
      point,\'94 enough to set up a pleasurable feeling of fuss; for his\
      good practical sense told him that if he himself were on the\
      Bench he would not pay much attention to it. But he was afraid\
      that this Bosinney would go bankrupt and Soames would have to\
      find the money after all, and costs into the bargain. And behind\
      this tangible dread there was always that intangible trouble,\
      lurking in the background, intricate, dim, scandalous, like a bad\
      dream, and of which this action was but an outward and visible\
      sign.\
\
      He raised his head as old Jolyon came in, and muttered: \'93How are\
      you, Jolyon? Haven\'92t seen you for an age. You\'92ve been to\
      Switzerland, they tell me. This young Bosinney, he\'92s got himself\
      into a mess. I knew how it would be!\'94 He held out the papers,\
      regarding his elder brother with nervous gloom.\
\
      Old Jolyon read them in silence, and while he read them James\
      looked at the floor, biting his fingers the while.\
\
      Old Jolyon pitched them down at last, and they fell with a thump\
      amongst a mass of affidavits in \'93_re_ Buncombe, deceased,\'94 one of\
      the many branches of that parent and profitable tree, \'93Fryer _v_.\
      Forsyte.\'94\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know what Soames is about,\'94 he said, \'93to make a fuss\
      over a few hundred pounds. I thought he was a man of property.\'94\
\
      James\'92 long upper lip twitched angrily; he could not bear his son\
      to be attacked in such a spot.\
\
      \'93It\'92s not the money,\'94 he began, but meeting his brother\'92s glance,\
      direct, shrewd, judicial, he stopped.\
\
      There was a silence.\
\
      \'93I\'92ve come in for my Will,\'94 said old Jolyon at last, tugging at\
      his moustache.\
\
      James\'92 curiosity was roused at once. Perhaps nothing in this life\
      was more stimulating to him than a Will; it was the supreme deal\
      with property, the final inventory of a man\'92s belongings, the\
      last word on what he was worth. He sounded the bell.\
\
      \'93Bring in Mr. Jolyon\'92s Will,\'94 he said to an anxious, dark-haired\
      clerk.\
\
      \'93You going to make some alterations?\'94 And through his mind there\
      flashed the thought: \'93Now, am I worth as much as he?\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon put the Will in his breast pocket, and James twisted\
      his long legs regretfully.\
\
      \'93You\'92ve made some nice purchases lately, they tell me,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know where you get your information from,\'94 answered old\
      Jolyon sharply. \'93When\'92s this action coming on? Next month? I\
      can\'92t tell what you\'92ve got in your minds. You must manage your\
      own affairs; but if you take my advice, you\'92ll settle it out of\
      Court. Good-bye!\'94 With a cold handshake he was gone.\
\
      James, his fixed grey-blue eye corkscrewing round some secret\
      anxious image, began again to bite his finger.\
\
      Old Jolyon took his Will to the offices of the New Colliery\
      Company, and sat down in the empty Board Room to read it through.\
      He answered \'93Down-by-the-starn\'94 Hemmings so tartly when the\
      latter, seeing his Chairman seated there, entered with the new\
      Superintendent\'92s first report, that the Secretary withdrew with\
      regretful dignity; and sending for the transfer clerk, blew him\
      up till the poor youth knew not where to look.\
\
      It was not\'97by George\'97as he (Down-by-the-starn) would have him\
      know, for a whippersnapper of a young fellow like him, to come\
      down to that office, and think that he was God Almighty. He\
      (Down-by-the-starn) had been head of that office for more years\
      than a boy like him could count, and if he thought that when he\
      had finished all his work, he could sit there doing nothing, he\
      did not know him, Hemmings (Down-by-the-starn), and so forth.\
\
      On the other side of the green baize door old Jolyon sat at the\
      long, mahogany-and-leather board table, his thick, loose-jointed,\
      tortoiseshell eye-glasses perched on the bridge of his nose, his\
      gold pencil moving down the clauses of his Will.\
\
      It was a simple affair, for there were none of those vexatious\
      little legacies and donations to charities, which fritter away a\
      man\'92s possessions, and damage the majestic effect of that little\
      paragraph in the morning papers accorded to Forsytes who die with\
      a hundred thousand pounds.\
\
      A simple affair. Just a bequest to his son of twenty thousand,\
      and \'93as to the residue of my property of whatsoever kind whether\
      realty or personalty, or partaking of the nature of either\'97upon\
      trust to pay the proceeds rents annual produce dividends or\
      interest thereof and thereon to my said grand-daughter June\
      Forsyte or her assigns during her life to be for her sole use and\
      benefit and without, etc... and from and after her death or\
      decease upon trust to convey assign transfer or make over the\
      said last-mentioned lands hereditaments premises trust moneys\
      stocks funds investments and securities or such as shall then\
      stand for and represent the same unto such person or persons\
      whether one or more for such intents purposes and uses and\
      generally in such manner way and form in all respects as the said\
      June Forsyte notwithstanding coverture shall by her last Will and\
      Testament or any writing or writings in the nature of a Will\
      testament or testamentary disposition to be by her duly made\
      signed and published direct appoint or make over give and dispose\
      of the same And in default etc.... Provided always...\'94 and so on,\
      in seven folios of brief and simple phraseology.\
\
      The Will had been drawn by James in his palmy days. He had\
      foreseen almost every contingency.\
\
      Old Jolyon sat a long time reading this Will; at last he took\
      half a sheet of paper from the rack, and made a prolonged pencil\
      note; then buttoning up the Will, he caused a cab to be called\
      and drove to the offices of Paramor and Herring, in Lincoln\'92s Inn\
      Fields. Jack Herring was dead, but his nephew was still in the\
      firm, and old Jolyon was closeted with him for half an hour.\
\
      He had kept the hansom, and on coming out, gave the driver the\
      address\'973, Wistaria Avenue.\
\
      He felt a strange, slow satisfaction, as though he had scored a\
      victory over James and the man of property. They should not poke\
      their noses into his affairs any more; he had just cancelled\
      their trusteeships of his Will; he would take the whole of his\
      business out of their hands, and put it into the hands of young\
      Herring, and he would move the business of his Companies too. If\
      that young Soames were such a man of property, he would never\
      miss a thousand a year or so; and under his great white moustache\
      old Jolyon grimly smiled. He felt that what he was doing was in\
      the nature of retributive justice, richly deserved.\
\
      Slowly, surely, with the secret inner process that works the\
      destruction of an old tree, the poison of the wounds to his\
      happiness, his will, his pride, had corroded the comely edifice\
      of his philosophy. Life had worn him down on one side, till, like\
      that family of which he was the head, he had lost balance.\
\
      To him, borne northwards towards his son\'92s house, the thought of\
      the new disposition of property, which he had just set in motion,\
      appeared vaguely in the light of a stroke of punishment, levelled\
      at that family and that Society, of which James and his son\
      seemed to him the representatives. He had made a restitution to\
      young Jolyon, and restitution to young Jolyon satisfied his\
      secret craving for revenge\'97revenge against Time, sorrow, and\
      interference, against all that incalculable sum of disapproval\
      that had been bestowed by the world for fifteen years on his only\
      son. It presented itself as the one possible way of asserting\
      once more the domination of his will; of forcing James, and\
      Soames, and the family, and all those hidden masses of Forsytes\'97a\
      great stream rolling against the single dam of his obstinacy\'97to\
      recognise once and for all that _he would be master_. It was\
      sweet to think that at last he was going to make the boy a richer\
      man by far than that son of James, that \'93man of property.\'94 And it\
      was sweet to give to Jo, for he loved his son.\
\
      Neither young Jolyon nor his wife were in (young Jolyon indeed\
      was not back from the Botanical), but the little maid told him\
      that she expected the master at any moment:\
\
      \'93He\'92s always at \'92ome to tea, sir, to play with the children.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon said he would wait; and sat down patiently enough in\
      the faded, shabby drawing room, where, now that the summer\
      chintzes were removed, the old chairs and sofas revealed all\
      their threadbare deficiencies. He longed to send for the\
      children; to have them there beside him, their supple bodies\
      against his knees; to hear Jolly\'92s: \'93Hallo, Gran!\'94 and see his\
      rush; and feel Holly\'92s soft little hand stealing up against his\
      cheek. But he would not. There was solemnity in what he had come\
      to do, and until it was over he would not play. He amused himself\
      by thinking how with two strokes of his pen he was going to\
      restore the look of caste so conspicuously absent from everything\
      in that little house; how he could fill these rooms, or others in\
      some larger mansion, with triumphs of art from Baple and\
      Pullbred\'92s; how he could send little Jolly to Harrow and Oxford\
      (he no longer had faith in Eton and Cambridge, for his son had\
      been there); how he could procure little Holly the best musical\
      instruction, the child had a remarkable aptitude.\
\
      As these visions crowded before him, causing emotion to swell his\
      heart, he rose, and stood at the window, looking down into the\
      little walled strip of garden, where the pear-tree, bare of\
      leaves before its time, stood with gaunt branches in the\
      slow-gathering mist of the autumn afternoon. The dog Balthasar,\
      his tail curled tightly over a piebald, furry back, was walking\
      at the farther end, sniffing at the plants, and at intervals\
      placing his leg for support against the wall.\
\
      And old Jolyon mused.\
\
      What pleasure was there left but to give? It was pleasant to\
      give, when you could find one who would be thankful for what you\
      gave\'97one of your own flesh and blood! There was no such\
      satisfaction to be had out of giving to those who did not belong\
      to you, to those who had no claim on you! Such giving as that was\
      a betrayal of the individualistic convictions and actions of his\
      life, of all his enterprise, his labour, and his moderation, of\
      the great and proud fact that, like tens of thousands of Forsytes\
      before him, tens of thousands in the present, tens of thousands\
      in the future, he had always made his own, and held his own, in\
      the world.\
\
      And, while he stood there looking down on the smut-covered\
      foliage of the laurels, the black-stained grass-plot, the\
      progress of the dog Balthasar, all the suffering of the fifteen\
      years during which he had been baulked of legitimate enjoyment\
      mingled its gall with the sweetness of the approaching moment.\
\
      Young Jolyon came at last, pleased with his work, and fresh from\
      long hours in the open air. On hearing that his father was in the\
      drawing room, he inquired hurriedly whether Mrs. Forsyte was at\
      home, and being informed that she was not, heaved a sigh of\
      relief. Then putting his painting materials carefully in the\
      little coat-closet out of sight, he went in.\
\
      With characteristic decision old Jolyon came at once to the\
      point. \'93I\'92ve been altering my arrangements, Jo,\'94 he said. \'93You\
      can cut your coat a bit longer in the future\'97I\'92m settling a\
      thousand a year on you at once. June will have fifty thousand at\
      my death; and you the rest. That dog of yours is spoiling the\
      garden. I shouldn\'92t keep a dog, if I were you!\'94\
\
      The dog Balthasar, seated in the centre of the lawn, was\
      examining his tail.\
\
      Young Jolyon looked at the animal, but saw him dimly, for his\
      eyes were misty.\
\
      \'93Yours won\'92t come short of a hundred thousand, my boy,\'94 said old\
      Jolyon; \'93I thought you\'92d better know. I haven\'92t much longer to\
      live at my age. I shan\'92t allude to it again. How\'92s your wife?\
      And\'97give her my love.\'94\
\
      Young Jolyon put his hand on his father\'92s shoulder, and, as\
      neither spoke, the episode closed.\
\
      Having seen his father into a hansom, young Jolyon came back to\
      the drawing-room and stood, where old Jolyon had stood, looking\
      down on the little garden. He tried to realize all that this\
      meant to him, and, Forsyte that he was, vistas of property were\
      opened out in his brain; the years of half rations through which\
      he had passed had not sapped his natural instincts. In extremely\
      practical form, he thought of travel, of his wife\'92s costume, the\
      children\'92s education, a pony for Jolly, a thousand things; but in\
      the midst of all he thought, too, of Bosinney and his mistress,\
      and the broken song of the thrush. Joy\'97tragedy! Which? Which?\
\
      The old past\'97the poignant, suffering, passionate, wonderful past,\
      that no money could buy, that nothing could restore in all its\
      burning sweetness\'97had come back before him.\
\
      When his wife came in he went straight up to her and took her in\
      his arms; and for a long time he stood without speaking, his eyes\
      closed, pressing her to him, while she looked at him with a\
      wondering, adoring, doubting look in her eyes.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER IV VOYAGE INTO THE INFERNO\
\
      The morning after a certain night on which Soames at last\
      asserted his rights and acted like a man, he breakfasted alone.\
\
      He breakfasted by gaslight, the fog of late November wrapping the\
      town as in some monstrous blanket till the trees of the Square\
      even were barely visible from the dining-room window.\
\
      He ate steadily, but at times a sensation as though he could not\
      swallow attacked him. Had he been right to yield to his\
      overmastering hunger of the night before, and break down the\
      resistance which he had suffered now too long from this woman who\
      was his lawful and solemnly constituted helpmate?\
\
      He was strangely haunted by the recollection of her face, from\
      before which, to soothe her, he had tried to pull her hands\'97of\
      her terrible smothered sobbing, the like of which he had never\
      heard, and still seemed to hear; and he was still haunted by the\
      odd, intolerable feeling of remorse and shame he had felt, as he\
      stood looking at her by the flame of the single candle, before\
      silently slinking away.\
\
      And somehow, now that he had acted like this, he was surprised at\
      himself.\
\
      Two nights before, at Winifred Dartie\'92s, he had taken Mrs.\
      MacAnder into dinner. She had said to him, looking in his face\
      with her sharp, greenish eyes: \'93And so your wife is a great\
      friend of that Mr. Bosinney\'92s?\'94\
\
      Not deigning to ask what she meant, he had brooded over her\
      words.\
\
      They had roused in him a fierce jealousy, which, with the\
      peculiar perversion of this instinct, had turned to fiercer\
      desire.\
\
      Without the incentive of Mrs. MacAnder\'92s words he might never\
      have done what he had done. Without their incentive and the\
      accident of finding his wife\'92s door for once unlocked, which had\
      enabled him to steal upon her asleep.\
\
      Slumber had removed his doubts, but the morning brought them\
      again. One thought comforted him: No one would know\'97it was not\
      the sort of thing that she would speak about.\
\
      And, indeed, when the vehicle of his daily business life, which\
      needed so imperatively the grease of clear and practical thought,\
      started rolling once more with the reading of his letters, those\
      nightmare-like doubts began to assume less extravagant importance\
      at the back of his mind. The incident was really not of great\
      moment; women made a fuss about it in books; but in the cool\
      judgment of right-thinking men, of men of the world, of such as\
      he recollected often received praise in the Divorce Court, he had\
      but done his best to sustain the sanctity of marriage, to prevent\
      her from abandoning her duty, possibly, if she were still seeing\
      Bosinney, from....\
\
      No, he did not regret it.\
\
      Now that the first step towards reconciliation had been taken,\
      the rest would be comparatively\'97comparatively....\
\
      He, rose and walked to the window. His nerve had been shaken. The\
      sound of smothered sobbing was in his ears again. He could not\
      get rid of it.\
\
      He put on his fur coat, and went out into the fog; having to go\
      into the City, he took the underground railway from Sloane Square\
      station.\
\
      In his corner of the first-class compartment filled with City men\
      the smothered sobbing still haunted him, so he opened _The Times_\
      with the rich crackle that drowns all lesser sounds, and,\
      barricaded behind it, set himself steadily to con the news.\
\
      He read that a Recorder had charged a grand jury on the previous\
      day with a more than usually long list of offences. He read of\
      three murders, five manslaughters, seven arsons, and as many as\
      eleven rapes\'97a surprisingly high number\'97in addition to many less\
      conspicuous crimes, to be tried during a coming Sessions; and\
      from one piece of news he went on to another, keeping the paper\
      well before his face.\
\
      And still, inseparable from his reading, was the memory of\
      Irene\'92s tear-stained face, and the sounds from her broken heart.\
\
      The day was a busy one, including, in addition to the ordinary\
      affairs of his practice, a visit to his brokers, Messrs. Grin and\
      Grinning, to give them instructions to sell his shares in the New\
      Colliery Co., Ltd., whose business he suspected, rather than\
      knew, was stagnating (this enterprise afterwards slowly declined,\
      and was ultimately sold for a song to an American syndicate); and\
      a long conference at Waterbuck, Q.C.\'92s chambers, attended by\
      Boulter, by Fiske, the junior counsel, and Waterbuck, Q.C.,\
      himself.\
\
      The case of Forsyte _v_. Bosinney was expected to be reached on\
      the morrow, before Mr. Justice Bentham.\
\
      Mr. Justice Bentham, a man of common-sense rather than too great\
      legal knowledge, was considered to be about the best man they\
      could have to try the action. He was a \'93strong\'94 Judge.\
\
      Waterbuck, Q.C., in pleasing conjunction with an almost rude\
      neglect of Boulter and Fiske paid to Soames a good deal of\
      attention, by instinct or the sounder evidence of rumour, feeling\
      him to be a man of property.\
\
      He held with remarkable consistency to the opinion he had already\
      expressed in writing, that the issue would depend to a great\
      extent on the evidence given at the trial, and in a few well\
      directed remarks he advised Soames not to be too careful in\
      giving that evidence. \'93A little bluffness, Mr. Forsyte,\'94 he said,\
      \'93a little bluffness,\'94 and after he had spoken he laughed firmly,\
      closed his lips tight, and scratched his head just below where he\
      had pushed his wig back, for all the world like the\
      gentleman-farmer for whom he loved to be taken. He was considered\
      perhaps the leading man in breach of promise cases.\
\
      Soames used the underground again in going home.\
\
      The fog was worse than ever at Sloane Square station. Through the\
      still, thick blur, men groped in and out; women, very few,\
      grasped their reticules to their bosoms and handkerchiefs to\
      their mouths; crowned with the weird excrescence of the driver,\
      haloed by a vague glow of lamp-light that seemed to drown in\
      vapour before it reached the pavement, cabs loomed dim-shaped\
      ever and again, and discharged citizens, bolting like rabbits to\
      their burrows.\
\
      And these shadowy figures, wrapped each in his own little shroud\
      of fog, took no notice of each other. In the great warren, each\
      rabbit for himself, especially those clothed in the more\
      expensive fur, who, afraid of carriages on foggy days, are driven\
      underground.\
\
      One figure, however, not far from Soames, waited at the station\
      door.\
\
      Some buccaneer or lover, of whom each Forsyte thought: \'93Poor\
      devil! looks as if he were having a bad time!\'94 Their kind hearts\
      beat a stroke faster for that poor, waiting, anxious lover in the\
      fog; but they hurried by, well knowing that they had neither time\
      nor money to spare for any suffering but their own.\
\
      Only a policeman, patrolling slowly and at intervals, took an\
      interest in that waiting figure, the brim of whose slouch hat\
      half hid a face reddened by the cold, all thin, and haggard, over\
      which a hand stole now and again to smooth away anxiety, or renew\
      the resolution that kept him waiting there. But the waiting lover\
      (if lover he were) was used to policemen\'92s scrutiny, or too\
      absorbed in his anxiety, for he never flinched. A hardened case,\
      accustomed to long trysts, to anxiety, and fog, and cold, if only\
      his mistress came at last. Foolish lover! Fogs last until the\
      spring; there is also snow and rain, no comfort anywhere; gnawing\
      fear if you bring her out, gnawing fear if you bid her stay at\
      home!\
\
      \'93Serve him right; he should arrange his affairs better!\'94\
\
      So any respectable Forsyte. Yet, if that sounder citizen could\
      have listened at the waiting lover\'92s heart, out there in the fog\
      and the cold, he would have said again: \'93Yes, poor devil he\'92s\
      having a bad time!\'94\
\
      Soames got into his cab, and, with the glass down, crept along\
      Sloane Street, and so along the Brompton Road, and home. He\
      reached his house at five.\
\
      His wife was not in. She had gone out a quarter of an hour\
      before. Out at such a time of night, into this terrible fog! What\
      was the meaning of that?\
\
      He sat by the dining-room fire, with the door open, disturbed to\
      the soul, trying to read the evening paper. A book was no good\'97in\
      daily papers alone was any narcotic to such worry as his. From\
      the customary events recorded in the journal he drew some\
      comfort. \'93Suicide of an actress\'94\'97\'93Grave indisposition of a\
      Statesman\'94 (that chronic sufferer)\'97\'93Divorce of an army\
      officer\'94\'97\'93Fire in a colliery\'94\'97he read them all. They helped him a\
      little\'97prescribed by the greatest of all doctors, our natural\
      taste.\
\
      It was nearly seven when he heard her come in.\
\
      The incident of the night before had long lost its importance\
      under stress of anxiety at her strange sortie into the fog. But\
      now that Irene was home, the memory of her broken-hearted sobbing\
      came back to him, and he felt nervous at the thought of facing\
      her.\
\
      She was already on the stairs; her grey fur coat hung to her\
      knees, its high collar almost hid her face, she wore a thick\
      veil.\
\
      She neither turned to look at him nor spoke. No ghost or stranger\
      could have passed more silently.\
\
      Bilson came to lay dinner, and told him that Mrs. Forsyte was not\
      coming down; she was having the soup in her room.\
\
      For once Soames did not \'93change\'94; it was, perhaps, the first time\
      in his life that he had sat down to dinner with soiled cuffs,\
      and, not even noticing them, he brooded long over his wine. He\
      sent Bilson to light a fire in his picture-room, and presently\
      went up there himself.\
\
      Turning on the gas, he heaved a deep sigh, as though amongst\
      these treasures, the backs of which confronted him in stacks,\
      around the little room, he had found at length his peace of mind.\
      He went straight up to the greatest treasure of them all, an\
      undoubted Turner, and, carrying it to the easel, turned its face\
      to the light. There had been a movement in Turners, but he had\
      not been able to make up his mind to part with it. He stood for a\
      long time, his pale, clean-shaven face poked forward above his\
      stand-up collar, looking at the picture as though he were adding\
      it up; a wistful expression came into his eyes; he found,\
      perhaps, that it came to too little. He took it down from the\
      easel to put it back against the wall; but, in crossing the room,\
      stopped, for he seemed to hear sobbing.\
\
      It was nothing\'97only the sort of thing that had been bothering him\
      in the morning. And soon after, putting the high guard before the\
      blazing fire, he stole downstairs.\
\
      Fresh for the morrow! was his thought. It was long before he went\
      to sleep....\
\
      It is now to George Forsyte that the mind must turn for light on\
      the events of that fog-engulfed afternoon.\
\
      The wittiest and most sportsmanlike of the Forsytes had passed\
      the day reading a novel in the paternal mansion at Princes\'92\
      Gardens. Since a recent crisis in his financial affairs he had\
      been kept on parole by Roger, and compelled to reside \'93at home.\'94\
\
      Towards five o\'92clock he went out, and took train at South\
      Kensington Station (for everyone to-day went Underground). His\
      intention was to dine, and pass the evening playing billiards at\
      the Red Pottle\'97that unique hostel, neither club, hotel, nor good\
      gilt restaurant.\
\
      He got out at Charing Cross, choosing it in preference to his\
      more usual St. James\'92s Park, that he might reach Jermyn Street by\
      better lighted ways.\
\
      On the platform his eyes\'97for in combination with a composed and\
      fashionable appearance, George had sharp eyes, and was always on\
      the look-out for fillips to his sardonic humour\'97his eyes were\
      attracted by a man, who, leaping from a first-class compartment,\
      staggered rather than walked towards the exit.\
\
      \'93So ho, my bird!\'94 said George to himself; \'93why, it\'92s \'93the\
      Buccaneer!\'94\'94 and he put his big figure on the trail. Nothing\
      afforded him greater amusement than a drunken man.\
\
      Bosinney, who wore a slouch hat, stopped in front of him, spun\
      around, and rushed back towards the carriage he had just left. He\
      was too late. A porter caught him by the coat; the train was\
      already moving on.\
\
      George\'92s practised glance caught sight of the face of a lady clad\
      in a grey fur coat at the carriage window. It was Mrs. Soames\'97and\
      George felt that this was interesting!\
\
      And now he followed Bosinney more closely than ever\'97up the\
      stairs, past the ticket collector into the street. In that\
      progress, however, his feelings underwent a change; no longer\
      merely curious and amused, he felt sorry for the poor fellow he\
      was shadowing. \'93The Buccaneer\'94 was not drunk, but seemed to be\
      acting under the stress of violent emotion; he was talking to\
      himself, and all that George could catch were the words \'93Oh,\
      God!\'94 Nor did he appear to know what he was doing, or where\
      going; but stared, hesitated, moved like a man out of his mind;\
      and from being merely a joker in search of amusement, George felt\
      that he must see the poor chap through.\
\
      He had \'93taken the knock\'94\'97\'93taken the knock!\'94 And he wondered what\
      on earth Mrs. Soames had been saying, what on earth she had been\
      telling him in the railway carriage. She had looked bad enough\
      herself! It made George sorry to think of her travelling on with\
      her trouble all alone.\
\
      He followed close behind Bosinney\'92s elbow\'97tall, burly figure,\
      saying nothing, dodging warily\'97and shadowed him out into the fog.\
\
      There was something here beyond a jest! He kept his head\
      admirably, in spite of some excitement, for in addition to\
      compassion, the instincts of the chase were roused within him.\
\
      Bosinney walked right out into the thoroughfare\'97a vast muffled\
      blackness, where a man could not see six paces before him; where,\
      all around, voices or whistles mocked the sense of direction; and\
      sudden shapes came rolling slow upon them; and now and then a\
      light showed like a dim island in an infinite dark sea.\
\
      And fast into this perilous gulf of night walked Bosinney, and\
      fast after him walked George. If the fellow meant to put his\
      \'93twopenny\'94 under a \'92bus, he would stop it if he could! Across the\
      street and back the hunted creature strode, not groping as other\
      men were groping in that gloom, but driven forward as though the\
      faithful George behind wielded a knout; and this chase after a\
      haunted man began to have for George the strangest fascination.\
\
      But it was now that the affair developed in a way which ever\
      afterwards caused it to remain green in his mind. Brought to a\
      stand-still in the fog, he heard words which threw a sudden light\
      on these proceedings. What Mrs. Soames had said to Bosinney in\
      the train was now no longer dark. George understood from those\
      mutterings that Soames had exercised his rights over an estranged\
      and unwilling wife in the greatest\'97the supreme act of property.\
\
      His fancy wandered in the fields of this situation; it impressed\
      him; he guessed something of the anguish, the sexual confusion\
      and horror in Bosinney\'92s heart. And he thought: \'93Yes, it\'92s a bit\
      thick! I don\'92t wonder the poor fellow is half-cracked!\'94\
\
      He had run his quarry to earth on a bench under one of the lions\
      in Trafalgar Square, a monster sphynx astray like themselves in\
      that gulf of darkness. Here, rigid and silent, sat Bosinney, and\
      George, in whose patience was a touch of strange brotherliness,\
      took his stand behind. He was not lacking in a certain delicacy\'97a\
      sense of form\'97that did not permit him to intrude upon this\
      tragedy, and he waited, quiet as the lion above, his fur collar\
      hitched above his ears concealing the fleshy redness of his\
      cheeks, concealing all but his eyes with their sardonic,\
      compassionate stare. And men kept passing back from business on\
      the way to their clubs\'97men whose figures shrouded in cocoons of\
      fog came into view like spectres, and like spectres vanished.\
      Then even in his compassion George\'92s Quilpish humour broke forth\
      in a sudden longing to pluck these spectres by the sleeve, and\
      say:\
\
      \'93Hi, you Johnnies! You don\'92t often see a show like this! Here\'92s a\
      poor devil whose mistress has just been telling him a pretty\
      little story of her husband; walk up, walk up! He\'92s taken the\
      knock, you see.\'94\
\
      In fancy he saw them gaping round the tortured lover; and grinned\
      as he thought of some respectable, newly-married spectre enabled\
      by the state of his own affections to catch an inkling of what\
      was going on within Bosinney; he fancied he could see his mouth\
      getting wider and wider, and the fog going down and down. For in\
      George was all that contempt of the middle-class\'97especially of\
      the married middle-class\'97peculiar to the wild and sportsmanlike\
      spirits in its ranks.\
\
      But he began to be bored. Waiting was not what he had bargained\
      for.\
\
      \'93After all,\'94 he thought, \'93the poor chap will get over it; not the\
      first time such a thing has happened in this little city!\'94 But\
      now his quarry again began muttering words of violent hate and\
      anger. And following a sudden impulse George touched him on the\
      shoulder.\
\
      Bosinney spun round.\
\
      \'93Who are you? What do you want?\'94\
\
      George could have stood it well enough in the light of the gas\
      lamps, in the light of that everyday world of which he was so\
      hardy a connoisseur; but in this fog, where all was gloomy and\
      unreal, where nothing had that matter-of-fact value associated by\
      Forsytes with earth, he was a victim to strange qualms, and as he\
      tried to stare back into the eyes of this maniac, he thought:\
\
      \'93If I see a bobby, I\'92ll hand him over; he\'92s not fit to be at\
      large.\'94\
\
      But waiting for no answer, Bosinney strode off into the fog, and\
      George followed, keeping perhaps a little further off, yet more\
      than ever set on tracking him down.\
\
      \'93He can\'92t go on long like this,\'94 he thought. \'93It\'92s God\'92s own\
      miracle he\'92s not been run over already.\'94 He brooded no more on\
      policemen, a sportsman\'92s sacred fire alive again within him.\
\
      Into a denser gloom than ever Bosinney held on at a furious pace;\
      but his pursuer perceived more method in his madness\'97he was\
      clearly making his way westwards.\
\
      \'93He\'92s really going for Soames!\'94 thought George. The idea was\
      attractive. It would be a sporting end to such a chase. He had\
      always disliked his cousin.\
\
      The shaft of a passing cab brushed against his shoulder and made\
      him leap aside. He did not intend to be killed for the Buccaneer,\
      or anyone. Yet, with hereditary tenacity, he stuck to the trail\
      through vapour that blotted out everything but the shadow of the\
      hunted man and the dim moon of the nearest lamp.\
\
      Then suddenly, with the instinct of a town-stroller, George knew\
      himself to be in Piccadilly. Here he could find his way\
      blindfold; and freed from the strain of geographical uncertainty,\
      his mind returned to Bosinney\'92s trouble.\
\
      Down the long avenue of his man-about-town experience, bursting,\
      as it were, through a smirch of doubtful amours, there stalked to\
      him a memory of his youth. A memory, poignant still, that brought\
      the scent of hay, the gleam of moonlight, a summer magic, into\
      the reek and blackness of this London fog\'97the memory of a night\
      when in the darkest shadow of a lawn he had overheard from a\
      woman\'92s lips that he was not her sole possessor. And for a moment\
      George walked no longer in black Piccadilly, but lay again, with\
      hell in his heart, and his face to the sweet-smelling, dewy\
      grass, in the long shadow of poplars that hid the moon.\
\
      A longing seized him to throw his arm round the Buccaneer, and\
      say, \'93Come, old boy. Time cures all. Let\'92s go and drink it off!\'94\
\
      But a voice yelled at him, and he started back. A cab rolled out\
      of blackness, and into blackness disappeared. And suddenly George\
      perceived that he had lost Bosinney. He ran forward and back,\
      felt his heart clutched by a sickening fear, the dark fear which\
      lives in the wings of the fog. Perspiration started out on his\
      brow. He stood quite still, listening with all his might.\
\
      \'93And then,\'94 as he confided to Dartie the same evening in the\
      course of a game of billiards at the Red Pottle, \'93I lost him.\'94\
\
      Dartie twirled complacently at his dark moustache. He had just\
      put together a neat break of twenty-three,\'97failing at a \'93Jenny.\'94\
      \'93And who was _she?_\'94 he asked.\
\
      George looked slowly at the \'93man of the world\'92s\'94 fattish, sallow\
      face, and a little grim smile lurked about the curves of his\
      cheeks and his heavy-lidded eyes.\
\
      \'93No, no, my fine fellow,\'94 he thought, \'93I\'92m not going to tell\
      _you_.\'94 For though he mixed with Dartie a good deal, he thought\
      him a bit of a cad.\
\
      \'93Oh, some little love-lady or other,\'94 he said, and chalked his\
      cue.\
\
      \'93A love-lady!\'94 exclaimed Dartie\'97he used a more figurative\
      expression. \'93I made sure it was our friend Soa....\'94\
\
      \'93Did you?\'94 said George curtly. \'93Then damme you\'92ve made an error.\'94\
\
      He missed his shot. He was careful not to allude to the subject\
      again till, towards eleven o\'92clock, having, in his poetic\
      phraseology, \'93looked upon the drink when it was yellow,\'94 he drew\
      aside the blind, and gazed out into the street. The murky\
      blackness of the fog was but faintly broken by the lamps of the\
      \'93Red Pottle,\'94 and no shape of mortal man or thing was in sight.\
\
      \'93I can\'92t help thinking of that poor Buccaneer,\'94 he said. \'93He may\
      be wandering out there now in that fog. If he\'92s not a corpse,\'94 he\
      added with strange dejection.\
\
      \'93Corpse!\'94 said Dartie, in whom the recollection of his defeat at\
      Richmond flared up. \'93_He\'92s_ all right. Ten to one if he wasn\'92t\
      tight!\'94\
\
      George turned on him, looking really formidable, with a sort of\
      savage gloom on his big face.\
\
      \'93Dry up!\'94 he said. \'93Don\'92t I tell you he\'92s \'91taken the knock!\'92\'94\
\
\
      CHAPTER V THE TRIAL\
\
      In the morning of his case, which was second in the list, Soames\
      was again obliged to start without seeing Irene, and it was just\
      as well, for he had not as yet made up his mind what attitude to\
      adopt towards her.\
\
      He had been requested to be in court by half-past ten, to provide\
      against the event of the first action (a breach of promise)\
      collapsing, which however it did not, both sides showing a\
      courage that afforded Waterbuck, Q.C., an opportunity for\
      improving his already great reputation in this class of case. He\
      was opposed by Ram, the other celebrated breach of promise man.\
      It was a battle of giants.\
\
      The court delivered judgment just before the luncheon interval.\
      The jury left the box for good, and Soames went out to get\
      something to eat. He met James standing at the little\
      luncheon-bar, like a pelican in the wilderness of the galleries,\
      bent over a sandwich with a glass of sherry before him. The\
      spacious emptiness of the great central hall, over which father\
      and son brooded as they stood together, was marred now and then\
      for a fleeting moment by barristers in wig and gown hurriedly\
      bolting across, by an occasional old lady or rusty-coated man,\
      looking up in a frightened way, and by two persons, bolder than\
      their generation, seated in an embrasure arguing. The sound of\
      their voices arose, together with a scent as of neglected wells,\
      which, mingling with the odour of the galleries, combined to form\
      the savour, like nothing but the emanation of a refined cheese,\
      so indissolubly connected with the administration of British\
      Justice.\
\
      It was not long before James addressed his son.\
\
      \'93When\'92s your case coming on? I suppose it\'92ll be on directly. I\
      shouldn\'92t wonder if this Bosinney\'92d say anything; I should think\
      he\'92d have to. He\'92ll go bankrupt if it goes against him.\'94 He took\
      a large bite at his sandwich and a mouthful of sherry. \'93Your\
      mother,\'94 he said, \'93wants you and Irene to come and dine\
      to-night.\'94\
\
      A chill smile played round Soames\'92s lips; he looked back at his\
      father. Anyone who had seen the look, cold and furtive, thus\
      interchanged, might have been pardoned for not appreciating the\
      real understanding between them. James finished his sherry at a\
      draught.\
\
      \'93How much?\'94 he asked.\
\
      On returning to the court Soames took at once his rightful seat\
      on the front bench beside his solicitor. He ascertained where his\
      father was seated with a glance so sidelong as to commit nobody.\
\
      James, sitting back with his hands clasped over the handle of his\
      umbrella, was brooding on the end of the bench immediately behind\
      counsel, whence he could get away at once when the case was over.\
      He considered Bosinney\'92s conduct in every way outrageous, but he\
      did not wish to run up against him, feeling that the meeting\
      would be awkward.\
\
      Next to the Divorce Court, this court was, perhaps, the favourite\
      emporium of justice, libel, breach of promise, and other\
      commercial actions being frequently decided there. Quite a\
      sprinkling of persons unconnected with the law occupied the back\
      benches, and the hat of a woman or two could be seen in the\
      gallery.\
\
      The two rows of seats immediately in front of James were\
      gradually filled by barristers in wigs, who sat down to make\
      pencil notes, chat, and attend to their teeth; but his interest\
      was soon diverted from these lesser lights of justice by the\
      entrance of Waterbuck, Q.C., with the wings of his silk gown\
      rustling, and his red, capable face supported by two short, brown\
      whiskers. The famous Q.C. looked, as James freely admitted, the\
      very picture of a man who could heckle a witness.\
\
      For all his experience, it so happened that he had never seen\
      Waterbuck, Q.C., before, and, like many Forsytes in the lower\
      branch of the profession, he had an extreme admiration for a good\
      cross-examiner. The long, lugubrious folds in his cheeks relaxed\
      somewhat after seeing him, especially as he now perceived that\
      Soames alone was represented by silk.\
\
      Waterbuck, Q.C., had barely screwed round on his elbow to chat\
      with his Junior before Mr. Justice Bentham himself appeared\'97a\
      thin, rather hen-like man, with a little stoop, clean-shaven\
      under his snowy wig. Like all the rest of the court, Waterbuck\
      rose, and remained on his feet until the judge was seated. James\
      rose but slightly; he was already comfortable, and had no opinion\
      of Bentham, having sat next but one to him at dinner twice at the\
      Bumley Tomms\'92. Bumley Tomm was rather a poor thing, though he had\
      been so successful. James himself had given him his first brief.\
      He was excited, too, for he had just found out that Bosinney was\
      not in court.\
\
      \'93Now, what\'92s he mean by that?\'94 he kept on thinking.\
\
      The case having been called on, Waterbuck, Q.C., pushing back his\
      papers, hitched his gown on his shoulder, and, with a\
      semi-circular look around him, like a man who is going to bat,\
      arose and addressed the Court.\
\
      The facts, he said, were not in dispute, and all that his\
      Lordship would be asked was to interpret the correspondence which\
      had taken place between his client and the defendant, an\
      architect, with reference to the decoration of a house. He would,\
      however, submit that this correspondence could only mean one very\
      plain thing. After briefly reciting the history of the house at\
      Robin Hill, which he described as a mansion, and the actual facts\
      of expenditure, he went on as follows:\
\
      \'93My client, Mr. Soames Forsyte, is a gentleman, a man of\
      property, who would be the last to dispute any legitimate claim\
      that might be made against him, but he has met with such\
      treatment from his architect in the matter of this house, over\
      which he has, as your lordship has heard, already spent some\
      twelve\'97some twelve thousand pounds, a sum considerably in advance\
      of the amount he had originally contemplated, that as a matter of\
      principle\'97and this I cannot too strongly emphasize\'97as a matter of\
      principle, and in the interests of others, he has felt himself\
      compelled to bring this action. The point put forward in defence\
      by the architect I will suggest to your lordship is not worthy of\
      a moment\'92s serious consideration.\'94 He then read the\
      correspondence.\
\
      His client, \'93a man of recognised position,\'94 was prepared to go\
      into the box, and to swear that he never did authorize, that it\
      was never in his mind to authorize, the expenditure of any money\
      beyond the extreme limit of twelve thousand and fifty pounds,\
      which he had clearly fixed; and not further to waste the time of\
      the court, he would at once call Mr. Forsyte.\
\
      Soames then went into the box. His whole appearance was striking\
      in its composure. His face, just supercilious enough, pale and\
      clean-shaven, with a little line between the eyes, and compressed\
      lips; his dress in unostentatious order, one hand neatly gloved,\
      the other bare. He answered the questions put to him in a\
      somewhat low, but distinct voice. His evidence under\
      cross-examination savoured of taciturnity.\
\
      Had he not used the expression, \'93a free hand\'94? No.\
\
      \'93Come, come!\'94\
\
      The expression he had used was \'93a free hand in the terms of this\
      correspondence.\'94\
\
      \'93Would you tell the Court that that was English?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes!\'94\
\
      \'93What do you say it means?\'94\
\
      \'93What it says!\'94\
\
      \'93Are you prepared to deny that it is a contradiction in terms?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      \'93You are not an Irishman?\'94\
\
      \'93No.\'94\
\
      \'93Are you a well-educated man?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      \'93And yet you persist in that statement?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      Throughout this and much more cross-examination, which turned\
      again and again around the \'93nice point,\'94 James sat with his hand\
      behind his ear, his eyes fixed upon his son.\
\
      He was proud of him! He could not but feel that in similar\
      circumstances he himself would have been tempted to enlarge his\
      replies, but his instinct told him that this taciturnity was the\
      very thing. He sighed with relief, however, when Soames, slowly\
      turning, and without any change of expression, descended from the\
      box.\
\
      When it came to the turn of Bosinney\'92s Counsel to address the\
      Judge, James redoubled his attention, and he searched the Court\
      again and again to see if Bosinney were not somewhere concealed.\
\
      Young Chankery began nervously; he was placed by Bosinney\'92s\
      absence in an awkward position. He therefore did his best to turn\
      that absence to account.\
\
      He could not but fear\'97he said\'97that his client had met with an\
      accident. He had fully expected him there to give evidence; they\
      had sent round that morning both to Mr. Bosinney\'92s office and to\
      his rooms (though he knew they were one and the same, he thought\
      it was as well not to say so), but it was not known where he was,\
      and this he considered to be ominous, knowing how anxious Mr.\
      Bosinney had been to give his evidence. He had not, however, been\
      instructed to apply for an adjournment, and in default of such\
      instruction he conceived it his duty to go on. The plea on which\
      he somewhat confidently relied, and which his client, had he not\
      unfortunately been prevented in some way from attending, would\
      have supported by his evidence, was that such an expression as a\
      \'93free hand\'94 could not be limited, fettered, and rendered\
      unmeaning, by any verbiage which might follow it. He would go\
      further and say that the correspondence showed that whatever he\
      might have said in his evidence, Mr. Forsyte had in fact never\
      contemplated repudiating liability on any of the work ordered or\
      executed by his architect. The defendant had certainly never\
      contemplated such a contingency, or, as was demonstrated by his\
      letters, he would never have proceeded with the work\'97a work of\
      extreme delicacy, carried out with great care and efficiency, to\
      meet and satisfy the fastidious taste of a connoisseur, a rich\
      man, a man of property. He felt strongly on this point, and\
      feeling strongly he used, perhaps, rather strong words when he\
      said that this action was of a most unjustifiable, unexpected,\
      indeed\'97unprecedented character. If his Lordship had had the\
      opportunity that he himself had made it his duty to take, to go\
      over this very fine house and see the great delicacy and beauty\
      of the decorations executed by his client\'97an artist in his most\
      honourable profession\'97he felt convinced that not for one moment\
      would his Lordship tolerate this, he would use no stronger word\
      than daring attempt to evade legitimate responsibility.\
\
      Taking the text of Soames\'92s letters, he lightly touched on\
      \'93Boileau _v_. The Blasted Cement Company, Limited.\'94 \'93It is\
      doubtful,\'94 he said, \'93what that authority has decided; in any case\
      I would submit that it is just as much in my favour as in my\
      friend\'92s.\'94 He then argued the \'93nice point\'94 closely. With all due\
      deference he submitted that Mr. Forsyte\'92s expression nullified\
      itself. His client not being a rich man, the matter was a serious\
      one for him; he was a very talented architect, whose professional\
      reputation was undoubtedly somewhat at stake. He concluded with a\
      perhaps too personal appeal to the Judge, as a lover of the arts,\
      to show himself the protector of artists, from what was\
      occasionally\'97he said occasionally\'97the too iron hand of capital.\
      \'93What,\'94 he said, \'93will be the position of the artistic\
      professions, if men of property like this Mr. Forsyte refuse, and\
      are allowed to refuse, to carry out the obligations of the\
      commissions which they have given.\'94 He would now call his client,\
      in case he should at the last moment have found himself able to\
      be present.\
\
      The name Philip Baynes Bosinney was called three times by the\
      Ushers, and the sound of the calling echoed with strange\
      melancholy throughout the Court and Galleries.\
\
      The crying of this name, to which no answer was returned, had\
      upon James a curious effect: it was like calling for your lost\
      dog about the streets. And the creepy feeling that it gave him,\
      of a man missing, grated on his sense of comfort and security\'97on\
      his cosiness. Though he could not have said why, it made him feel\
      uneasy.\
\
      He looked now at the clock\'97a quarter to three! It would be all\
      over in a quarter of an hour. Where could the young fellow be?\
\
      It was only when Mr. Justice Bentham delivered judgment that he\
      got over the turn he had received.\
\
      Behind the wooden erection, by which he was fenced from more\
      ordinary mortals, the learned Judge leaned forward. The electric\
      light, just turned on above his head, fell on his face, and\
      mellowed it to an orange hue beneath the snowy crown of his wig;\
      the amplitude of his robes grew before the eye; his whole figure,\
      facing the comparative dusk of the Court, radiated like some\
      majestic and sacred body. He cleared his throat, took a sip of\
      water, broke the nib of a quill against the desk, and, folding\
      his bony hands before him, began.\
\
      To James he suddenly loomed much larger than he had ever thought\
      Bentham would loom. It was the majesty of the law; and a person\
      endowed with a nature far less matter-of-fact than that of James\
      might have been excused for failing to pierce this halo, and\
      disinter therefrom the somewhat ordinary Forsyte, who walked and\
      talked in every-day life under the name of Sir Walter Bentham.\
\
      He delivered judgment in the following words:\
\
      \'93The facts in this case are not in dispute. On May 15 last the\
      defendant wrote to the plaintiff, requesting to be allowed to\
      withdraw from his professional position in regard to the\
      decoration of the plaintiff\'92s house, unless he were given \'91a free\
      hand.\'92 The plaintiff, on May 17, wrote back as follows: \'91In\
      giving you, in accordance with your request, this free hand, I\
      wish you to clearly understand that the total cost of the house\
      as handed over to me completely decorated, inclusive of your fee\
      (as arranged between us) must not exceed twelve thousand pounds.\'92\
      To this letter the defendant replied on May 18: \'91If you think\
      that in such a delicate matter as decoration I can bind myself to\
      the exact pound, I am afraid you are mistaken.\'92 On May 19 the\
      plaintiff wrote as follows: \'91I did not mean to say that if you\
      should exceed the sum named in my letter to you by ten or twenty\
      or even fifty pounds there would be any difficulty between us.\
      You have a free hand in the terms of this correspondence, and I\
      hope you will see your way to completing the decorations.\'92 On May\
      20 the defendant replied thus shortly: \'91Very well.\'92\
\
      \'93In completing these decorations, the defendant incurred\
      liabilities and expenses which brought the total cost of this\
      house up to the sum of twelve thousand four hundred pounds, all\
      of which expenditure has been defrayed by the plaintiff. This\
      action has been brought by the plaintiff to recover from the\
      defendant the sum of three hundred and fifty pounds expended by\
      him in excess of a sum of twelve thousand and fifty pounds,\
      alleged by the plaintiff to have been fixed by this\
      correspondence as the maximum sum that the defendant had\
      authority to expend.\
\
      \'93The question for me to decide is whether or no the defendant is\
      liable to refund to the plaintiff this sum. In my judgment he is\
      so liable.\
\
      \'93What in effect the plaintiff has said is this \'91I give you a free\
      hand to complete these decorations, provided that you keep within\
      a total cost to me of twelve thousand pounds. If you exceed that\
      sum by as much as fifty pounds, I will not hold you responsible;\
      beyond that point you are no agent of mine, and I shall repudiate\
      liability.\'92 It is not quite clear to me whether, had the\
      plaintiff in fact repudiated liability under his agent\'92s\
      contracts, he would, under all the circumstances, have been\
      successful in so doing; but he has not adopted this course. He\
      has accepted liability, and fallen back upon his rights against\
      the defendant under the terms of the latter\'92s engagement.\
\
      \'93In my judgment the plaintiff is entitled to recover this sum\
      from the defendant.\
\
      \'93It has been sought, on behalf of the defendant, to show that no\
      limit of expenditure was fixed or intended to be fixed by this\
      correspondence. If this were so, I can find no reason for the\
      plaintiff\'92s importation into the correspondence of the figures of\
      twelve thousand pounds and subsequently of fifty pounds. The\
      defendant\'92s contention would render these figures meaningless. It\
      is manifest to me that by his letter of May 20 he assented to a\
      very clear proposition, by the terms of which he must be held to\
      be bound.\
\
      \'93For these reasons there will be judgment for the plaintiff for\
      the amount claimed with costs.\'94\
\
      James sighed, and stooping, picked up his umbrella which had\
      fallen with a rattle at the words \'93importation into this\
      correspondence.\'94\
\
      Untangling his legs, he rapidly left the Court; without waiting\
      for his son, he snapped up a hansom cab (it was a clear, grey\
      afternoon) and drove straight to Timothy\'92s where he found\
      Swithin; and to him, Mrs. Septimus Small, and Aunt Hester, he\
      recounted the whole proceedings, eating two muffins not\
      altogether in the intervals of speech.\
\
      \'93Soames did very well,\'94 he ended; \'93he\'92s got his head screwed on\
      the right way. This won\'92t please Jolyon. It\'92s a bad business for\
      that young Bosinney; he\'92ll go bankrupt, I shouldn\'92t wonder,\'94 and\
      then after a long pause, during which he had stared disquietly\
      into the fire, he added:\
\
      \'93He wasn\'92t there\'97now why?\'94\
\
      There was a sound of footsteps. The figure of a thick-set man,\
      with the ruddy brown face of robust health, was seen in the back\
      drawing-room. The forefinger of his upraised hand was outlined\
      against the black of his frock coat. He spoke in a grudging\
      voice.\
\
      \'93Well, James,\'94 he said, \'93I can\'92t\'97I can\'92t stop,\'94 and turning\
      round, he walked out.\
\
      It was Timothy.\
\
      James rose from his chair. \'93There!\'94 he said, \'93there! I knew there\
      was something wro....\'94 He checked himself, and was silent,\
      staring before him, as though he had seen a portent.\
\
\
      CHAPTER VI SOAMES BREAKS THE NEWS\
\
      In leaving the Court Soames did not go straight home. He felt\
      disinclined for the City, and drawn by need for sympathy in his\
      triumph, he, too, made his way, but slowly and on foot, to\
      Timothy\'92s in the Bayswater Road.\
\
      His father had just left; Mrs. Small and Aunt Hester, in\
      possession of the whole story, greeted him warmly. They were sure\
      he was hungry after all that evidence. Smither should toast him\
      some more muffins, his dear father had eaten them all. He must\
      put his legs up on the sofa; and he must have a glass of prune\
      brandy too. It was so strengthening.\
\
      Swithin was still present, having lingered later than his wont,\
      for he felt in want of exercise. On hearing this suggestion, he\
      \'93pished.\'94 A pretty pass young men were coming to! His own liver\
      was out of order, and he could not bear the thought of anyone\
      else drinking prune brandy.\
\
      He went away almost immediately, saying to Soames: \'93And how\'92s\
      your wife? You tell her from me that if she\'92s dull, and likes to\
      come and dine with me quietly, I\'92ll give her such a bottle of\
      champagne as she doesn\'92t get every day.\'94 Staring down from his\
      height on Soames he contracted his thick, puffy, yellow hand as\
      though squeezing within it all this small fry, and throwing out\
      his chest he waddled slowly away.\
\
      Mrs. Small and Aunt Hester were left horrified. Swithin was so\
      droll!\
\
      They themselves were longing to ask Soames how Irene would take\
      the result, yet knew that they must not; he would perhaps say\
      something of his own accord, to throw some light on this, the\
      present burning question in their lives, the question that from\
      necessity of silence tortured them almost beyond bearing; for\
      even Timothy had now been told, and the effect on his health was\
      little short of alarming. And what, too, would June do? This,\
      also, was a most exciting, if dangerous speculation!\
\
      They had never forgotten old Jolyon\'92s visit, since when he had\
      not once been to see them; they had never forgotten the feeling\
      it gave all who were present, that the family was no longer what\
      it had been\'97that the family was breaking up.\
\
      But Soames gave them no help, sitting with his knees crossed,\
      talking of the Barbizon school of painters, whom he had just\
      discovered. These were the coming men, he said; he should not\
      wonder if a lot of money were made over them; he had his eye on\
      two pictures by a man called Corot, charming things; if he could\
      get them at a reasonable price he was going to buy them\'97they\
      would, he thought, fetch a big price some day.\
\
      Interested as they could not but be, neither Mrs. Septimus Small\
      nor Aunt Hester could entirely acquiesce in being thus put off.\
\
      It was interesting\'97most interesting\'97and then Soames was so clever\
      that they were sure he would do something with those pictures if\
      anybody could; but what was his plan now that he had won his\
      case; was he going to leave London at once, and live in the\
      country, or what was he going to do?\
\
      Soames answered that he did not know, he thought they should be\
      moving soon. He rose and kissed his aunts.\
\
      No sooner had Aunt Juley received this emblem of departure than a\
      change came over her, as though she were being visited by\
      dreadful courage; every little roll of flesh on her face seemed\
      trying to escape from an invisible, confining mask.\
\
      She rose to the full extent of her more than medium height, and\
      said: \'93It has been on my mind a long time, dear, and if nobody\
      else will tell you, I have made up my mind that....\'94\
\
      Aunt Hester interrupted her: \'93Mind, Julia, you do it....\'94 she\
      gasped\'97\'93on your own responsibility!\'94\
\
      Mrs. Small went on as though she had not heard: \'93I think you\
      _ought_ to know, dear, that Mrs. MacAnder saw Irene walking in\
      Richmond Park with Mr. Bosinney.\'94\
\
      Aunt Hester, who had also risen, sank back in her chair, and\
      turned her face away. Really Juley was too\'97she should not do such\
      things when she\'97Aunt Hester, was in the room; and, breathless\
      with anticipation, she waited for what Soames would answer.\
\
      He had flushed the peculiar flush which always centred between\
      his eyes; lifting his hand, and, as it were, selecting a finger,\
      he bit a nail delicately; then, drawling it out between set lips,\
      he said: \'93Mrs. MacAnder is a cat!\'94\
\
      Without waiting for any reply, he left the room.\
\
      When he went into Timothy\'92s he had made up his mind what course\
      to pursue on getting home. He would go up to Irene and say:\
\
      \'93Well, I\'92ve won my case, and there\'92s an end of it! I don\'92t want\
      to be hard on Bosinney; I\'92ll see if we can\'92t come to some\
      arrangement; he shan\'92t be pressed. And now let\'92s turn over a new\
      leaf! We\'92ll let the house, and get out of these fogs. We\'92ll go\
      down to Robin Hill at once. I\'97I never meant to be rough with you!\
      Let\'92s shake hands\'97and\'97\'94 Perhaps she would let him kiss her, and\
      forget!\
\
      When he came out of Timothy\'92s his intentions were no longer so\
      simple. The smouldering jealousy and suspicion of months blazed\
      up within him. He would put an end to that sort of thing once and\
      for all; he would not have her drag his name in the dirt! If she\
      could not or would not love him, as was her duty and his\
      right\'97she should not play him tricks with anyone else! He would\
      tax her with it; threaten to divorce her! That would make her\
      behave; she would never face that. But\'97but\'97what if she did? He\
      was staggered; this had not occurred to him.\
\
      What if she did? What if she made him a confession? How would he\
      stand then? He would have to bring a divorce!\
\
      A divorce! Thus close, the word was paralyzing, so utterly at\
      variance with all the principles that had hitherto guided his\
      life. Its lack of compromise appalled him; he felt\'97like the\
      captain of a ship, going to the side of his vessel, and, with his\
      own hands throwing over the most precious of his bales. This\
      jettisoning of his property with his own hand seemed uncanny to\
      Soames. It would injure him in his profession: He would have to\
      get rid of the house at Robin Hill, on which he had spent so much\
      money, so much anticipation\'97and at a sacrifice. And she! She\
      would no longer belong to him, not even in name! She would pass\
      out of his life, and he\'97he should never see her again!\
\
      He traversed in the cab the length of a street without getting\
      beyond the thought that he should never see her again!\
\
      But perhaps there was nothing to confess, even now very likely\
      there was nothing to confess. Was it wise to push things so far?\
      Was it wise to put himself into a position where he might have to\
      eat his words? The result of this case would ruin Bosinney; a\
      ruined man was desperate, but\'97what could he do? He might go\
      abroad, ruined men always went abroad. What could _they_ do\'97if\
      indeed it _was_ \'93_they_\'94\'97without money? It would be better to\
      wait and see how things turned out. If necessary, he could have\
      her watched. The agony of his jealousy (for all the world like\
      the crisis of an aching tooth) came on again; and he almost cried\
      out. But he must decide, fix on some course of action before he\
      got home. When the cab drew up at the door, he had decided\
      nothing.\
\
      He entered, pale, his hands moist with perspiration, dreading to\
      meet her, burning to meet her, ignorant of what he was to say or\
      do.\
\
      The maid Bilson was in the hall, and in answer to his question:\
      \'93Where is your mistress?\'94 told him that Mrs. Forsyte had left the\
      house about noon, taking with her a trunk and bag.\
\
      Snatching the sleeve of his fur coat away from her grasp, he\
      confronted her:\
\
      \'93What?\'94 he exclaimed; \'93what\'92s that you said?\'94 Suddenly\
      recollecting that he must not betray emotion, he added: \'93What\
      message did she leave?\'94 and noticed with secret terror the\
      startled look of the maid\'92s eyes.\
\
      \'93Mrs. Forsyte left no message, sir.\'94\
\
      \'93No message; very well, thank you, that will do. I shall be\
      dining out.\'94\
\
      The maid went downstairs, leaving him still in his fur coat, idly\
      turning over the visiting cards in the porcelain bowl that stood\
      on the carved oak rug chest in the hall.\
\
      Mr. and Mrs. Bareham Culcher.\
      Mrs. Septimus Small.\
      Mrs. Baynes.\
      Mr. Solomon Thornworthy.\
      Lady Bellis.\
      Miss Hermione Bellis.\
      Miss Winifred Bellis.\
      Miss Ella Bellis.\
\
      Who the devil were all these people? He seemed to have forgotten\
      all familiar things. The words \'93no message\'97a trunk, and a bag,\'94\
      played a hide-and-seek in his brain. It was incredible that she\
      had left no message, and, still in his fur coat, he ran upstairs\
      two steps at a time, as a young married man when he comes home\
      will run up to his wife\'92s room.\
\
      Everything was dainty, fresh, sweet-smelling; everything in\
      perfect order. On the great bed with its lilac silk quilt, was\
      the bag she had made and embroidered with her own hands to hold\
      her sleeping things; her slippers ready at the foot; the sheets\
      even turned over at the head as though expecting her.\
\
      On the table stood the silver-mounted brushes and bottles from\
      her dressing bag, his own present. There must, then, be some\
      mistake. What bag had she taken? He went to the bell to summon\
      Bilson, but remembered in time that he must assume knowledge of\
      where Irene had gone, take it all as a matter of course, and\
      grope out the meaning for himself.\
\
      He locked the doors, and tried to think, but felt his brain going\
      round; and suddenly tears forced themselves into his eyes.\
\
      Hurriedly pulling off his coat, he looked at himself in the\
      mirror.\
\
      He was too pale, a greyish tinge all over his face; he poured out\
      water, and began feverishly washing.\
\
      Her silver-mounted brushes smelt faintly of the perfumed lotion\
      she used for her hair; and at this scent the burning sickness of\
      his jealousy seized him again.\
\
      Struggling into his fur, he ran downstairs and out into the\
      street.\
\
      He had not lost all command of himself, however, and as he went\
      down Sloane Street he framed a story for use, in case he should\
      not find her at Bosinney\'92s. But if he should? His power of\
      decision again failed; he reached the house without knowing what\
      he should do if he did find her there.\
\
      It was after office hours, and the street door was closed; the\
      woman who opened it could not say whether Mr. Bosinney were in or\
      no; she had not seen him that day, not for two or three days; she\
      did not attend to him now, nobody attended to him, he....\
\
      Soames interrupted her, he would go up and see for himself. He\
      went up with a dogged, white face.\
\
      The top floor was unlighted, the door closed, no one answered his\
      ringing, he could hear no sound. He was obliged to descend,\
      shivering under his fur, a chill at his heart. Hailing a cab, he\
      told the man to drive to Park Lane.\
\
      On the way he tried to recollect when he had last given her a\
      cheque; she could not have more than three or four pounds, but\
      there were her jewels; and with exquisite torture he remembered\
      how much money she could raise on these; enough to take them\
      abroad; enough for them to live on for months! He tried to\
      calculate; the cab stopped, and he got out with the calculation\
      unmade.\
\
      The butler asked whether Mrs. Soames was in the cab, the master\
      had told him they were both expected to dinner.\
\
      Soames answered: \'93No. Mrs. Forsyte has a cold.\'94\
\
      The butler was sorry.\
\
      Soames thought he was looking at him inquisitively, and\
      remembering that he was not in dress clothes, asked: \'93Anybody\
      here to dinner, Warmson?\'94\
\
      \'93Nobody but Mr. and Mrs. Dartie, sir.\'94\
\
      Again it seemed to Soames that the butler was looking curiously\
      at him. His composure gave way.\
\
      \'93What are you looking at?\'94 he said. \'93What\'92s the matter with me,\
      eh?\'94\
\
      The butler blushed, hung up the fur coat, murmured something that\
      sounded like: \'93Nothing, sir, I\'92m sure, sir,\'94 and stealthily\
      withdrew.\
\
      Soames walked upstairs. Passing the drawing-room without a look,\
      he went straight up to his mother\'92s and father\'92s bedroom.\
\
      James, standing sideways, the concave lines of his tall, lean\
      figure displayed to advantage in shirt-sleeves and evening\
      waistcoat, his head bent, the end of his white tie peeping askew\
      from underneath one white Dundreary whisker, his eyes peering\
      with intense concentration, his lips pouting, was hooking the top\
      hooks of his wife\'92s bodice. Soames stopped; he felt half-choked,\
      whether because he had come upstairs too fast, or for some other\
      reason. He\'97he himself had never\'97never been asked to....\
\
      He heard his father\'92s voice, as though there were a pin in his\
      mouth, saying: \'93Who\'92s that? Who\'92s there? What d\'92you want?\'94 His\
      mother\'92s: \'93Here, F\'e9lice, come and hook this; your master\'92ll never\
      get done.\'94\
\
      He put his hand up to his throat, and said hoarsely:\
\
      \'93It\'92s I\'97Soames!\'94\
\
      He noticed gratefully the affectionate surprise in Emily\'92s:\
      \'93Well, my dear boy?\'94 and James\'92, as he dropped the hook: \'93What,\
      Soames! What\'92s brought you up? Aren\'92t you well?\'94\
\
      He answered mechanically: \'93I\'92m all right,\'94 and looked at them,\
      and it seemed impossible to bring out his news.\
\
      James, quick to take alarm, began: \'93You don\'92t look well. I expect\
      you\'92ve taken a chill\'97it\'92s liver, I shouldn\'92t wonder. Your\
      mother\'92ll give you....\'94\
\
      But Emily broke in quietly: \'93Have you brought Irene?\'94\
\
      Soames shook his head.\
\
      \'93No,\'94 he stammered, \'93she\'97she\'92s left me!\'94\
\
      Emily deserted the mirror before which she was standing. Her\
      tall, full figure lost its majesty and became very human as she\
      came running over to Soames.\
\
      \'93My dear boy! My _dear_ boy!\'94\
\
      She put her lips to his forehead, and stroked his hand.\
\
      James, too, had turned full towards his son; his face looked\
      older.\
\
      \'93Left you?\'94 he said. \'93What d\'92you mean\'97left you? You never told me\
      she was going to leave you.\'94\
\
      Soames answered surlily: \'93How could I tell? What\'92s to be done?\'94\
\
      James began walking up and down; he looked strange and stork-like\
      without a coat. \'93What\'92s to be done!\'94 he muttered. \'93How should I\
      know what\'92s to be done? What\'92s the good of asking me? Nobody\
      tells me anything, and then they come and ask me what\'92s to be\
      done; and I should like to know how I\'92m to tell them! Here\'92s your\
      mother, there she stands; _she_ doesn\'92t say anything. What _I_\
      should say you\'92ve got to do is to follow her..\'94\
\
      Soames smiled; his peculiar, supercilious smile had never before\
      looked pitiable.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know where she\'92s gone,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93Don\'92t know where she\'92s gone!\'94 said James. \'93How d\'92you mean, don\'92t\
      know where she\'92s gone? Where d\'92you suppose she\'92s gone? She\'92s gone\
      after that young Bosinney, that\'92s where she\'92s gone. I knew how it\
      would be.\'94\
\
      Soames, in the long silence that followed, felt his mother\
      pressing his hand. And all that passed seemed to pass as though\
      his own power of thinking or doing had gone to sleep.\
\
      His father\'92s face, dusky red, twitching as if he were going to\
      cry, and words breaking out that seemed rent from him by some\
      spasm in his soul.\
\
      \'93There\'92ll be a scandal; I always said so.\'94 Then, no one saying\
      anything: \'93And there you stand, you and your mother!\'94\
\
      And Emily\'92s voice, calm, rather contemptuous: \'93Come, now, James!\
      Soames will do all that he can.\'94\
\
      And James, staring at the floor, a little brokenly: \'93Well, I\
      can\'92t help you; I\'92m getting old. Don\'92t you be in too great a\
      hurry, my boy.\'94\
\
      And his mother\'92s voice again: \'93Soames will do all he can to get\
      her back. We won\'92t talk of it. It\'92ll all come right, I dare say.\'94\
\
      And James: \'93Well, I can\'92t see how it can come right. And if she\
      hasn\'92t gone off with that young Bosinney, my advice to you is not\
      to listen to her, but to follow her and get her back.\'94\
\
      Once more Soames felt his mother stroking his hand, in token of\
      her approval, and as though repeating some form of sacred oath,\
      he muttered between his teeth: \'93I will!\'94\
\
      All three went down to the drawing-room together. There, were\
      gathered the three girls and Dartie; had Irene been present, the\
      family circle would have been complete.\
\
      James sank into his armchair, and except for a word of cold\
      greeting to Dartie, whom he both despised and dreaded, as a man\
      likely to be always in want of money, he said nothing till dinner\
      was announced. Soames, too, was silent; Emily alone, a woman of\
      cool courage, maintained a conversation with Winifred on trivial\
      subjects. She was never more composed in her manner and\
      conversation than that evening.\
\
      A decision having been come to not to speak of Irene\'92s flight, no\
      view was expressed by any other member of the family as to the\
      right course to be pursued; there can be little doubt, from the\
      general tone adopted in relation to events as they afterwards\
      turned out, that James\'92s advice: \'93Don\'92t you listen to her, follow\
      her and get her back!\'94 would, with here and there an exception,\
      have been regarded as sound, not only in Park Lane, but amongst\
      the Nicholases, the Rogers, and at Timothy\'92s. Just as it would\
      surely have been endorsed by that wider body of Forsytes all over\
      London, who were merely excluded from judgment by ignorance of\
      the story.\
\
      In spite then of Emily\'92s efforts, the dinner was served by\
      Warmson and the footman almost in silence. Dartie was sulky, and\
      drank all he could get; the girls seldom talked to each other at\
      any time. James asked once where June was, and what she was doing\
      with herself in these days. No one could tell him. He sank back\
      into gloom. Only when Winifred recounted how little Publius had\
      given his bad penny to a beggar, did he brighten up.\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 he said, \'93that\'92s a clever little chap. I don\'92t know what\'92ll\
      become of him, if he goes on like this. An intelligent little\
      chap, I call him!\'94 But it was only a flash.\
\
      The courses succeeded one another solemnly, under the electric\
      light, which glared down onto the table, but barely reached the\
      principal ornament of the walls, a so-called \'93Sea Piece by\
      Turner,\'94 almost entirely composed of cordage and drowning men.\
\
      Champagne was handed, and then a bottle of James\'92 prehistoric\
      port, but as by the chill hand of some skeleton.\
\
      At ten o\'92clock Soames left; twice in reply to questions, he had\
      said that Irene was not well; he felt he could no longer trust\
      himself. His mother kissed him with her large soft kiss, and he\
      pressed her hand, a flush of warmth in his cheeks. He walked away\
      in the cold wind, which whistled desolately round the corners of\
      the streets, under a sky of clear steel-blue, alive with stars;\
      he noticed neither their frosty greeting, nor the crackle of the\
      curled-up plane-leaves, nor the night-women hurrying in their\
      shabby furs, nor the pinched faces of vagabonds at street\
      corners. Winter was come! But Soames hastened home, oblivious;\
      his hands trembled as he took the late letters from the gilt wire\
      cage into which they had been thrust through the slit in the\
      door.\
\
      None from Irene!\
\
      He went into the dining-room; the fire was bright there, his\
      chair drawn up to it, slippers ready, spirit case, and carven\
      cigarette box on the table; but after staring at it all for a\
      minute or two, he turned out the light and went upstairs. There\
      was a fire too in his dressing-room, but her room was dark and\
      cold. It was into this room that Soames went.\
\
      He made a great illumination with candles, and for a long time\
      continued pacing up and down between the bed and the door. He\
      could not get used to the thought that she had really left him,\
      and as though still searching for some message, some reason, some\
      reading of all the mystery of his married life, he began opening\
      every recess and drawer.\
\
      There were her dresses; he had always liked, indeed insisted,\
      that she should be well-dressed\'97she had taken very few; two or\
      three at most, and drawer after drawer; full of linen and silk\
      things, was untouched.\
\
      Perhaps after all it was only a freak, and she had gone to the\
      seaside for a few days\'92 change. If only that were so, and she\
      were really coming back, he would never again do as he had done\
      that fatal night before last, never again run that risk\'97though it\
      was her duty, her duty as a wife; though she did belong to him\'97he\
      would never again run that risk; she was evidently not quite\
      right in her head!\
\
      He stooped over the drawer where she kept her jewels; it was not\
      locked, and came open as he pulled; the jewel box had the key in\
      it. This surprised him until he remembered that it was sure to be\
      empty. He opened it.\
\
      It was far from empty. Divided, in little green velvet\
      compartments, were all the things he had given her, even her\
      watch, and stuck into the recess that contained the watch was a\
      three-cornered note addressed \'93Soames Forsyte,\'94 in Irene\'92s\
      handwriting:\
\
      \'93I think I have taken nothing that you or your people have given\
      me.\'94 And that was all.\
\
      He looked at the clasps and bracelets of diamonds and pearls, at\
      the little flat gold watch with a great diamond set in sapphires,\
      at the chains and rings, each in its nest, and the tears rushed\
      up in his eyes and dropped upon them.\
\
      Nothing that she could have done, nothing that she _had_ done,\
      brought home to him like this the inner significance of her act.\
      For the moment, perhaps, he understood nearly all there was to\
      understand\'97understood that she loathed him, that she had loathed\
      him for years, that for all intents and purposes they were like\
      people living in different worlds, that there was no hope for\
      him, never had been; even, that she had suffered\'97that she was to\
      be pitied.\
\
      In that moment of emotion he betrayed the Forsyte in him\'97forgot\
      himself, his interests, his property\'97was capable of almost\
      anything; was lifted into the pure ether of the selfless and\
      unpractical.\
\
      Such moments pass quickly.\
\
      And as though with the tears he had purged himself of weakness,\
      he got up, locked the box, and slowly, almost trembling, carried\
      it with him into the other room.\
\
\
      CHAPTER VII JUNE\'92S VICTORY\
\
      June had waited for her chance, scanning the duller columns of\
      the journals, morning and evening with an assiduity which at\
      first puzzled old Jolyon; and when her chance came, she took it\
      with all the promptitude and resolute tenacity of her character.\
\
      She will always remember best in her life that morning when at\
      last she saw amongst the reliable Cause List of the _Times_\
      newspaper, under the heading of Court XIII, Mr. Justice Bentham,\
      the case of Forsyte _v_. Bosinney.\
\
      Like a gambler who stakes his last piece of money, she had\
      prepared to hazard her all upon this throw; it was not her nature\
      to contemplate defeat. How, unless with the instinct of a woman\
      in love, she knew that Bosinney\'92s discomfiture in this action was\
      assured, cannot be told\'97on this assumption, however, she laid her\
      plans, as upon a certainty.\
\
      Half past eleven found her at watch in the gallery of Court\
      XIII., and there she remained till the case of Forsyte _v_.\
      Bosinney was over. Bosinney\'92s absence did not disquiet her; she\
      had felt instinctively that he would not defend himself. At the\
      end of the judgment she hastened down, and took a cab to his\
      rooms.\
\
      She passed the open street-door and the offices on the three\
      lower floors without attracting notice; not till she reached the\
      top did her difficulties begin.\
\
      Her ring was not answered; she had now to make up her mind\
      whether she would go down and ask the caretaker in the basement\
      to let her in to await Mr. Bosinney\'92s return, or remain patiently\
      outside the door, trusting that no one would come up. She decided\
      on the latter course.\
\
      A quarter of an hour had passed in freezing vigil on the landing,\
      before it occurred to her that Bosinney had been used to leave\
      the key of his rooms under the door-mat. She looked and found it\
      there. For some minutes she could not decide to make use of it;\
      at last she let herself in and left the door open that anyone who\
      came might see she was there on business.\
\
      This was not the same June who had paid the trembling visit five\
      months ago; those months of suffering and restraint had made her\
      less sensitive; she had dwelt on this visit so long, with such\
      minuteness, that its terrors were discounted beforehand. She was\
      not there to fail this time, for if she failed no one could help\
      her.\
\
      Like some mother beast on the watch over her young, her little\
      quick figure never stood still in that room, but wandered from\
      wall to wall, from window to door, fingering now one thing, now\
      another. There was dust everywhere, the room could not have been\
      cleaned for weeks, and June, quick to catch at anything that\
      should buoy up her hope, saw in it a sign that he had been\
      obliged, for economy\'92s sake, to give up his servant.\
\
      She looked into the bedroom; the bed was roughly made, as though\
      by the hand of man. Listening intently, she darted in, and peered\
      into his cupboards. A few shirts and collars, a pair of muddy\
      boots\'97the room was bare even of garments.\
\
      She stole back to the sitting-room, and now she noticed the\
      absence of all the little things he had set store by. The clock\
      that had been his mother\'92s, the field-glasses that had hung over\
      the sofa; two really valuable old prints of Harrow, where his\
      father had been at school, and last, not least, the piece of\
      Japanese pottery she herself had given him. All were gone; and in\
      spite of the rage roused within her championing soul at the\
      thought that the world should treat him thus, their disappearance\
      augured happily for the success of her plan.\
\
      It was while looking at the spot where the piece of Japanese\
      pottery had stood that she felt a strange certainty of being\
      watched, and, turning, saw Irene in the open doorway.\
\
      The two stood gazing at each other for a minute in silence; then\
      June walked forward and held out her hand. Irene did not take it.\
\
      When her hand was refused, June put it behind her. Her eyes grew\
      steady with anger; she waited for Irene to speak; and thus\
      waiting, took in, with who-knows-what rage of jealousy,\
      suspicion, and curiosity, every detail of her friend\'92s face and\
      dress and figure.\
\
      Irene was clothed in her long grey fur; the travelling cap on her\
      head left a wave of gold hair visible above her forehead. The\
      soft fullness of the coat made her face as small as a child\'92s.\
\
      Unlike Jun\'92s cheeks, her cheeks had no colour in them, but were\
      ivory white and pinched as if with cold. Dark circles lay round\
      her eyes. In one hand she held a bunch of violets.\
\
      She looked back at June, no smile on her lips; and with those\
      great dark eyes fastened on her, the girl, for all her startled\
      anger, felt something of the old spell.\
\
      She spoke first, after all.\
\
      \'93What have you come for?\'94 But the feeling that she herself was\
      being asked the same question, made her add: \'93This horrible case.\
      I came to tell him\'97he has lost it.\'94\
\
      Irene did not speak, her eyes never moved from Jun\'92s face, and\
      the girl cried:\
\
      \'93Don\'92t stand there as if you were made of stone!\'94\
\
      Irene laughed: \'93I wish to God I were!\'94\
\
      But June turned away: \'93Stop!\'94 she cried, \'93don\'92t tell me! I don\'92t\
      want to hear! I don\'92t want to hear what you\'92ve come for. I don\'92t\
      want to hear!\'94 And like some uneasy spirit, she began swiftly\
      walking to and fro. Suddenly she broke out:\
\
      \'93I was here first. We can\'92t both stay here together!\'94\
\
      On Irene\'92s face a smile wandered up, and died out like a flicker\
      of firelight. She did not move. And then it was that June\
      perceived under the softness and immobility of this figure\
      something desperate and resolved; something not to be turned\
      away, something dangerous. She tore off her hat, and, putting\
      both hands to her brow, pressed back the bronze mass of her hair.\
\
      \'93You have no right here!\'94 she cried defiantly.\
\
      Irene answered: \'93I have no right anywhere\'97\'97\'94\
\
      \'93What do you mean?\'94\
\
      \'93I have left Soames. You always wanted me to!\'94\
\
      June put her hands over her ears.\
\
      \'93Don\'92t! I don\'92t want to hear anything\'97I don\'92t want to know\
      anything. It\'92s impossible to fight with you! What makes you stand\
      like that? Why don\'92t you go?\'94\
\
      Irene\'92s lips moved; she seemed to be saying: \'93Where should I go?\'94\
\
      June turned to the window. She could see the face of a clock down\
      in the street. It was nearly four. At any moment he might come!\
      She looked back across her shoulder, and her face was distorted\
      with anger.\
\
      But Irene had not moved; in her gloved hands she ceaselessly\
      turned and twisted the little bunch of violets.\
\
      The tears of rage and disappointment rolled down Jun\'92s cheeks.\
\
      \'93How _could_ you come?\'94 she said. \'93You have been a false friend\
      to me!\'94\
\
      Again Irene laughed. June saw that she had played a wrong card,\
      and broke down.\
\
      \'93Why have you come?\'94 she sobbed. \'93You\'92ve ruined my life, and now\
      you want to ruin his!\'94\
\
      Irene\'92s mouth quivered; her eyes met Jun\'92s with a look so\
      mournful that the girl cried out in the midst of her sobbing,\
      \'93No, no!\'94\
\
      But Irene\'92s head bent till it touched her breast. She turned, and\
      went quickly out, hiding her lips with the little bunch of\
      violets.\
\
      June ran to the door. She heard the footsteps going down and\
      down. She called out: \'93Come back, Irene! Come back!\'94\
\
      The footsteps died away....\
\
      Bewildered and torn, the girl stood at the top of the stairs. Why\
      had Irene gone, leaving her mistress of the field? What did it\
      mean? Had she really given him up to her? Or had she...? And she\
      was the prey of a gnawing uncertainty.... Bosinney did not\
      come....\
\
      About six o\'92clock that afternoon old Jolyon returned from\
      Wistaria Avenue, where now almost every day he spent some hours,\
      and asked if his grand-daughter were upstairs. On being told that\
      she had just come in, he sent up to her room to request her to\
      come down and speak to him.\
\
      He had made up his mind to tell her that he was reconciled with\
      her father. In future bygones must be bygones. He would no longer\
      live alone, or practically alone, in this great house; he was\
      going to give it up, and take one in the country for his son,\
      where they could all go and live together. If June did not like\
      this, she could have an allowance and live by herself. It\
      wouldn\'92t make much difference to her, for it was a long time\
      since she had shown him any affection.\
\
      But when June came down, her face was pinched and piteous; there\
      was a strained, pathetic look in her eyes. She snuggled up in her\
      old attitude on the arm of his chair, and what he said compared\
      but poorly with the clear, authoritative, injured statement he\
      had thought out with much care. His heart felt sore, as the great\
      heart of a mother-bird feels sore when its youngling flies and\
      bruises its wing. His words halted, as though he were apologizing\
      for having at last deviated from the path of virtue, and\
      succumbed, in defiance of sounder principles, to his more natural\
      instincts.\
\
      He seemed nervous lest, in thus announcing his intentions, he\
      should be setting his granddaughter a bad example; and now that\
      he came to the point, his way of putting the suggestion that, if\
      she didn\'92t like it, she could live by herself and lump it, was\
      delicate in the extreme.\
\
      \'93And if, by any chance, my darling,\'94 he said, \'93you found you\
      didn\'92t get on\'97with them, why, I could make that all right. You\
      could have what you liked. We could find a little flat in London\
      where you could set up, and I could be running to continually.\
      But the children,\'94 he added, \'93are dear little things!\'94\
\
      Then, in the midst of this grave, rather transparent, explanation\
      of changed policy, his eyes twinkled. \'93This\'92ll astonish Timothy\'92s\
      weak nerves. That precious young thing will have something to say\
      about this, or I\'92m a Dutchman!\'94\
\
      June had not yet spoken. Perched thus on the arm of his chair,\
      with her head above him, her face was invisible. But presently he\
      felt her warm cheek against his own, and knew that, at all\
      events, there was nothing very alarming in her attitude towards\
      his news. He began to take courage.\
\
      \'93You\'92ll like your father,\'94 he said\'97\'93an amiable chap. Never was\
      much push about him, but easy to get on with. You\'92ll find him\
      artistic and all that.\'94\
\
      And old Jolyon bethought him of the dozen or so water-colour\
      drawings all carefully locked up in his bedroom; for now that his\
      son was going to become a man of property he did not think them\
      quite such poor things as heretofore.\
\
      \'93As to your\'97your stepmother,\'94 he said, using the word with some\
      little difficulty, \'93I call her a refined woman\'97a bit of a Mrs.\
      Gummidge, I shouldn\'92t wonder\'97but very fond of Jo. And the\
      children,\'94 he repeated\'97indeed, this sentence ran like music\
      through all his solemn self-justification\'97\'93are sweet little\
      things!\'94\
\
      If June had known, those words but reincarnated that tender love\
      for little children, for the young and weak, which in the past\
      had made him desert his son for her tiny self, and now, as the\
      cycle rolled, was taking him from her.\
\
      But he began to get alarmed at her silence, and asked\
      impatiently: \'93Well, what do you say?\'94\
\
      June slid down to his knee, and she in her turn began her tale.\
      She thought it would all go splendidly; she did not see any\
      difficulty, and she did not care a bit what people thought.\
\
      Old Jolyon wriggled. H\'92m! then people _would_ think! He had\
      thought that after all these years perhaps they wouldn\'92t! Well,\
      he couldn\'92t help it! Nevertheless, he could not approve of his\
      granddaughter\'92s way of putting it\'97she ought to mind what people\
      thought!\
\
      Yet he said nothing. His feelings were too mixed, too\
      inconsistent for expression.\
\
      No\'97went on June\'97she did not care; what business was it of theirs?\
      There was only one thing\'97and with her cheek pressing against his\
      knee, old Jolyon knew at once that this something was no trifle:\
      As he was going to buy a house in the country, would he not\'97to\
      please her\'97buy that splendid house of Soames\'92 at Robin Hill? It\
      was finished, it was perfectly beautiful, and no one would live\
      in it now. They would all be so happy there.\
\
      Old Jolyon was on the alert at once. Wasn\'92t the \'93man of property\'94\
      going to live in his new house, then? He never alluded to Soames\
      now but under this title.\
\
      \'93No\'94\'97June said\'97\'93he was not; she knew that he was not!\'94\
\
      How did she know?\
\
      She could not tell him, but she knew. She knew nearly for\
      certain! It was most unlikely; circumstances had changed! Irene\'92s\
      words still rang in her head: \'93I have left Soames. Where should I\
      go?\'94\
\
      But she kept silence about that.\
\
      If her grandfather would only buy it and settle that wretched\
      claim that ought never to have been made on Phil! It would be the\
      very best thing for everybody, and everything\'97everything might\
      come straight.\
\
      And June put her lips to his forehead, and pressed them close.\
\
      But old Jolyon freed himself from her caress, his face wore the\
      judicial look which came upon it when he dealt with affairs. He\
      asked: What did she mean? There was something behind all this\'97had\
      she been seeing Bosinney?\
\
      June answered: \'93No; but I have been to his rooms.\'94\
\
      \'93Been to his rooms? Who took you there?\'94\
\
      June faced him steadily. \'93I went alone. He has lost that case. I\
      don\'92t care whether it was right or wrong. I want to help him; and\
      _I will!_\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon asked again: \'93Have you seen him?\'94 His glance seemed to\
      pierce right through the girl\'92s eyes into her soul.\
\
      Again June answered: \'93No; he was not there. I waited, but he did\
      not come.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon made a movement of relief. She had risen and looked\
      down at him; so slight, and light, and young, but so fixed, and\
      so determined; and disturbed, vexed, as he was, he could not\
      frown away that fixed look. The feeling of being beaten, of the\
      reins having slipped, of being old and tired, mastered him.\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 he said at last, \'93you\'92ll get yourself into a mess one of\
      these days, I can see. You want your own way in everything.\'94\
\
      Visited by one of his strange bursts of philosophy, he added:\
      \'93Like that you were born; and like that you\'92ll stay until you\
      die!\'94\
\
      And he, who in his dealings with men of business, with Boards,\
      with Forsytes of all descriptions, with such as were not\
      Forsytes, had always had his own way, looked at his indomitable\
      grandchild sadly\'97for he felt in her that quality which above all\
      others he unconsciously admired.\
\
      \'93Do you know what they say is going on?\'94 he said slowly.\
\
      June crimsoned.\
\
      \'93Yes\'97no! I know\'97and I don\'92t know\'97I don\'92t care!\'94 and she stamped\
      her foot.\
\
      \'93I believe,\'94 said old Jolyon, dropping his eyes, \'93that you\'92d have\
      him if he were dead!\'94\
\
      There was a long silence before he spoke again.\
\
      \'93But as to buying this house\'97you don\'92t know what you\'92re talking\
      about!\'94\
\
      June said that she did. She knew that he could get it if he\
      wanted. He would only have to give what it cost.\
\
      \'93What it cost! You know nothing about it. I won\'92t go to\
      Soames\'97I\'92ll have nothing more to do with that young man.\'94\
\
      \'93But you needn\'92t; you can go to Uncle James. If you can\'92t buy the\
      house, will you pay his lawsuit claim? I know he is terribly hard\
      up\'97I\'92ve seen it. You can stop it out of my money!\'94\
\
      A twinkle came into old Jolyon\'92s eyes.\
\
      \'93Stop it out of your money! A pretty way. And what will you do,\
      pray, without your money?\'94\
\
      But secretly, the idea of wresting the house from James and his\
      son had begun to take hold of him. He had heard on Forsyte\
      \'92Change much comment, much rather doubtful praise of this house.\
      It was \'93too artistic,\'94 but a fine place. To take from the \'93man of\
      property\'94 that on which he had set his heart, would be a crowning\
      triumph over James, practical proof that he was going to make a\
      man of property of Jo, to put him back in his proper position,\
      and there to keep him secure. Justice once for all on those who\
      had chosen to regard his son as a poor, penniless outcast.\
\
      He would see, he would see! It might be out of the question; he\
      was not going to pay a fancy price, but if it could be done, why,\
      perhaps he would do it!\
\
      And still more secretly he knew that he could not refuse her.\
\
      But he did not commit himself. He would think it over\'97he said to\
      June.\
\
\
      CHAPTER VIII BOSINNEY\'92S DEPARTURE\
\
      Old Jolyon was not given to hasty decisions; it is probable that\
      he would have continued to think over the purchase of the house\
      at Robin Hill, had not Jun\'92s face told him that he would have no\
      peace until he acted.\
\
      At breakfast next morning she asked him what time she should\
      order the carriage.\
\
      \'93Carriage!\'94 he said, with some appearance of innocence; \'93what\
      for? _I\'92m_ not going out!\'94\
\
      She answered: \'93If you don\'92t go early, you won\'92t catch Uncle James\
      before he goes into the City.\'94\
\
      \'93James! what about your Uncle James?\'94\
\
      \'93The house,\'94 she replied, in such a voice that he no longer\
      pretended ignorance.\
\
      \'93I\'92ve not made up my mind,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93You must! You must! Oh! Gran\'97think of me!\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon grumbled out: \'93Think of you\'97I\'92m always thinking of\
      you, but you don\'92t think of yourself; you don\'92t think what you\'92re\
      letting yourself in for. Well, order the carriage at ten!\'94\
\
      At a quarter past he was placing his umbrella in the stand at\
      Park Lane\'97he did not choose to relinquish his hat and coat;\
      telling Warmson that he wanted to see his master, he went,\
      without being announced, into the study, and sat down.\
\
      James was still in the dining-room talking to Soames, who had\
      come round again before breakfast. On hearing who his visitor\
      was, he muttered nervously: \'93Now, what\'92s _he_ want, I wonder?\'94\
\
      He then got up.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said to Soames, \'93don\'92t you go doing anything in a\
      hurry. The first thing is to find out where she is\'97I should go to\
      Stainer\'92s about it; they\'92re the best men, if they can\'92t find her,\
      nobody can.\'94 And suddenly moved to strange softness, he muttered\
      to himself, \'93Poor little thing, _I_ can\'92t tell what she was\
      thinking about!\'94 and went out blowing his nose.\
\
      Old Jolyon did not rise on seeing his brother, but held out his\
      hand, and exchanged with him the clasp of a Forsyte.\
\
      James took another chair by the table, and leaned his head on his\
      hand.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said, \'93how are you? We don\'92t see much of _you_\
      nowadays!\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon paid no attention to the remark.\
\
      \'93How\'92s Emily?\'94 he asked; and waiting for no reply, went on \'93I\'92ve\
      come to see you about this affair of young Bosinney\'92s. I\'92m told\
      that new house of his is a white elephant.\'94\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know anything about a white elephant,\'94 said James, \'93I\
      know he\'92s lost his case, and I should say he\'92ll go bankrupt.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon was not slow to seize the opportunity this gave him.\
\
      \'93I shouldn\'92t wonder a bit!\'94 he agreed; \'93and if he goes bankrupt,\
      the \'91man of property\'92\'97that is, Soames\'92ll be out of pocket. Now,\
      what I was thinking was this: If he\'92s not going to live\
      there....\'94\
\
      Seeing both surprise and suspicion in James\'92 eye, he quickly went\
      on: \'93I don\'92t want to know anything; I suppose Irene\'92s put her\
      foot down\'97it\'92s not material to me. But I\'92m thinking of a house in\
      the country myself, not too far from London, and if it suited me\
      I don\'92t say that I mightn\'92t look at it, at a price.\'94\
\
      James listened to this statement with a strange mixture of doubt,\
      suspicion, and relief, merging into a dread of something behind,\
      and tinged with the remains of his old undoubted reliance upon\
      his elder brother\'92s good faith and judgment. There was anxiety,\
      too, as to what old Jolyon could have heard and how he had heard\
      it; and a sort of hopefulness arising from the thought that if\
      Jun\'92s connection with Bosinney were completely at an end, her\
      grandfather would hardly seem anxious to help the young fellow.\
      Altogether he was puzzled; as he did not like either to show\
      this, or to commit himself in any way, he said:\
\
      \'93They tell me you\'92re altering your Will in favour of your son.\'94\
\
      He had not been told this; he had merely added the fact of having\
      seen old Jolyon with his son and grandchildren to the fact that\
      he had taken his Will away from Forsyte, Bustard and Forsyte. The\
      shot went home.\
\
      \'93Who told you that?\'94 asked old Jolyon.\
\
      \'93I\'92m sure I don\'92t know,\'94 said James; \'93I can\'92t remember names\'97I\
      know somebody told me Soames spent a lot of money on this house;\
      he\'92s not likely to part with it except at a good price.\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said old Jolyon, \'93if, he thinks I\'92m going to pay a fancy\
      price, he\'92s mistaken. I\'92ve not got the money to throw away that\
      he seems to have. Let him try and sell it at a forced sale, and\
      see what he\'92ll get. It\'92s not every man\'92s house, I hear!\'94\
\
      James, who was secretly also of this opinion, answered: \'93It\'92s a\
      gentleman\'92s house. Soames is here now if you\'92d like to see him.\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said old Jolyon, \'93I haven\'92t got as far as that; and I\'92m not\
      likely to, I can see that very well if I\'92m met in this manner!\'94\
\
      James was a little cowed; when it came to the actual figures of a\
      commercial transaction he was sure of himself, for then he was\
      dealing with facts, not with men; but preliminary negotiations\
      such as these made him nervous\'97he never knew quite how far he\
      could go.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said, \'93I know nothing about it. Soames, he tells me\
      nothing; I should think he\'92d entertain it\'97it\'92s a question of\
      price.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 said old Jolyon, \'93don\'92t let him make a favour of it!\'94 He\
      placed his hat on his head in dudgeon.\
\
      The door was opened and Soames came in.\
\
      \'93There\'92s a policeman out here,\'94 he said with his half smile, \'93for\
      Uncle Jolyon.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon looked at him angrily, and James said: \'93A policeman? I\
      don\'92t know anything about a policeman. But I suppose you know\
      something about him,\'94 he added to old Jolyon with a look of\
      suspicion: \'93I suppose you\'92d better see him!\'94\
\
      In the hall an Inspector of Police stood stolidly regarding with\
      heavy-lidded pale-blue eyes the fine old English furniture picked\
      up by James at the famous Mavrojano sale in Portman Square.\
      \'93You\'92ll find my brother in there,\'94 said James.\
\
      The Inspector raised his fingers respectfully to his peaked cap,\
      and entered the study.\
\
      James saw him go in with a strange sensation.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said to Soames, \'93I suppose we must wait and see what\
      he wants. Your uncle\'92s been here about the house!\'94\
\
      He returned with Soames into the dining-room, but could not rest.\
\
      \'93Now what _does_ he want?\'94 he murmured again.\
\
      \'93Who?\'94 replied Soames: \'93the Inspector? They sent him round from\
      Stanhope Gate, that\'92s all I know. That \'91nonconformist\'92 of Uncle\
      Jolyon\'92s has been pilfering, I shouldn\'92t wonder!\'94\
\
      But in spite of his calmness, he too was ill at ease.\
\
      At the end of ten minutes old Jolyon came in. He walked up to the\
      table, and stood there perfectly silent pulling at his long white\
      moustaches. James gazed up at him with opening mouth; he had\
      never seen his brother look like this.\
\
      Old Jolyon raised his hand, and said slowly:\
\
      \'93Young Bosinney has been run over in the fog and killed.\'94\
\
      Then standing above his brother and his nephew, and looking down\
      at him with his deep eyes:\
\
      \'93There\'92s\'97some\'97talk\'97of\'97suicide,\'94 he said.\
\
      James\'92 jaw dropped. \'93_Suicide!_ What should he do that for?\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon answered sternly: \'93God knows, if you and your son\
      don\'92t!\'94\
\
      But James did not reply.\
\
      For all men of great age, even for all Forsytes, life has had\
      bitter experiences. The passer-by, who sees them wrapped in\
      cloaks of custom, wealth, and comfort, would never suspect that\
      such black shadows had fallen on their roads. To every man of\
      great age\'97to Sir Walter Bentham himself\'97the idea of suicide has\
      once at least been present in the ante-room of his soul; on the\
      threshold, waiting to enter, held out from the inmost chamber by\
      some chance reality, some vague fear, some painful hope. To\
      Forsytes that final renunciation of property is hard. Oh! it is\
      hard! Seldom\'97perhaps never\'97can they achieve, it; and yet, how\
      near have they not sometimes been!\
\
      So even with James! Then in the medley of his thoughts, he broke\
      out: \'93Why I saw it in the paper yesterday: \'91Run over in the fog!\'92\
      They didn\'92t know his name!\'94 He turned from one face to the other\
      in his confusion of soul; but instinctively all the time he was\
      rejecting that rumour of suicide. He dared not entertain this\
      thought, so against his interest, against the interest of his\
      son, of every Forsyte. He strove against it; and as his nature\
      ever unconsciously rejected that which it could not with safety\
      accept, so gradually he overcame this fear. It was an accident!\
      It must have been!\
\
      Old Jolyon broke in on his reverie.\
\
      \'93Death was instantaneous. He lay all day yesterday at the\
      hospital. There was nothing to tell them who he was. I am going\
      there now; you and your son had better come too.\'94\
\
      No one opposing this command he led the way from the room.\
\
      The day was still and clear and bright, and driving over to Park\
      Lane from Stanhope Gate, old Jolyon had had the carriage open.\
      Sitting back on the padded cushions, finishing his cigar, he had\
      noticed with pleasure the keen crispness of the air, the bustle\
      of the cabs and people; the strange, almost Parisian, alacrity\
      that the first fine day will bring into London streets after a\
      spell of fog or rain. And he had felt so happy; he had not felt\
      like it for months. His confession to June was off his mind; he\
      had the prospect of his son\'92s, above all, of his grandchildren\'92s\
      company in the future\'97(he had appointed to meet young Jolyon at\
      the Hotch Potch that very morning to discuss it again); and there\
      was the pleasurable excitement of a coming encounter, a coming\
      victory, over James and the \'93man of property\'94 in the matter of\
      the house.\
\
      He had the carriage closed now; he had no heart to look on\
      gaiety; nor was it right that Forsytes should be seen driving\
      with an Inspector of Police.\
\
      In that carriage the Inspector spoke again of the death:\
\
      \'93It was not so very thick\'97Just there. The driver says the\
      gentleman must have had time to see what he was about, he seemed\
      to walk right into it. It appears that he was very hard up, we\
      found several pawn tickets at his rooms, his account at the bank\
      is overdrawn, and there\'92s this case in to-day\'92s papers;\'94 his cold\
      blue eyes travelled from one to another of the three Forsytes in\
      the carriage.\
\
      Old Jolyon watching from his corner saw his brother\'92s face\
      change, and the brooding, worried, look deepen on it. At the\
      Inspector\'92s words, indeed, all James\'92 doubts and fears revived.\
      Hard-up\'97pawn-tickets\'97an overdrawn account! These words that had\
      all his life been a far-off nightmare to him, seemed to make\
      uncannily real that suspicion of suicide which must on no account\
      be entertained. He sought his son\'92s eye; but lynx-eyed, taciturn,\
      immovable, Soames gave no answering look. And to old Jolyon\
      watching, divining the league of mutual defence between them,\
      there came an overmastering desire to have his own son at his\
      side, as though this visit to the dead man\'92s body was a battle in\
      which otherwise he must single-handed meet those two. And the\
      thought of how to keep Jun\'92s name out of the business kept\
      whirring in his brain. James had his son to support him! Why\
      should he not send for Jo?\
\
      Taking out his card-case, he pencilled the following message:\
\
      \'93Come round at once. I\'92ve sent the carriage for you.\'94\
\
      On getting out he gave this card to his coachman, telling him to\
      drive\'97as fast as possible to the Hotch Potch Club, and if Mr.\
      Jolyon Forsyte were there to give him the card and bring him at\
      once. If not there yet, he was to wait till he came.\
\
      He followed the others slowly up the steps, leaning on his\
      umbrella, and stood a moment to get his breath. The Inspector\
      said: \'93This is the mortuary, sir. But take your time.\'94\
\
      In the bare, white-walled room, empty of all but a streak of\
      sunshine smeared along the dustless floor, lay a form covered by\
      a sheet. With a huge steady hand the Inspector took the hem and\
      turned it back. A sightless face gazed up at them, and on either\
      side of that sightless defiant face the three Forsytes gazed\
      down; in each one of them the secret emotions, fears, and pity of\
      his own nature rose and fell like the rising, falling waves of\
      life, whose wash those white walls barred out now for ever from\
      Bosinney. And in each one of them the trend of his nature, the\
      odd essential spring, which moved him in fashions minutely,\
      unalterably different from those of every other human being,\
      forced him to a different attitude of thought. Far from the\
      others, yet inscrutably close, each stood thus, alone with death,\
      silent, his eyes lowered.\
\
      The Inspector asked softly:\
\
      \'93You identify the gentleman, sir?\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon raised his head and nodded. He looked at his brother\
      opposite, at that long lean figure brooding over the dead man,\
      with face dusky red, and strained grey eyes; and at the figure of\
      Soames white and still by his father\'92s side. And all that he had\
      felt against those two was gone like smoke in the long white\
      presence of Death. Whence comes it, how comes it\'97Death? Sudden\
      reverse of all that goes before; blind setting forth on a path\
      that leads to where? Dark quenching of the fire! The heavy,\
      brutal crushing-out that all men must go through, keeping their\
      eyes clear and brave unto the end! Small and of no import,\
      insects though they are! And across old Jolyon\'92s face there\
      flitted a gleam, for Soames, murmuring to the Inspector, crept\
      noiselessly away.\
\
      Then suddenly James raised his eyes. There was a queer appeal in\
      that suspicious troubled look: \'93I know I\'92m no match for you,\'94 it\
      seemed to say. And, hunting for handkerchief he wiped his brow;\
      then, bending sorrowful and lank over the dead man, he too turned\
      and hurried out.\
\
      Old Jolyon stood, still as death, his eyes fixed on the body. Who\
      shall tell of what he was thinking? Of himself, when his hair was\
      brown like the hair of that young fellow dead before him? Of\
      himself, with his battle just beginning, the long, long battle he\
      had loved; the battle that was over for this young man almost\
      before it had begun? Of his grand-daughter, with her broken\
      hopes? Of that other woman? Of the strangeness, and the pity of\
      it? And the irony, inscrutable, and bitter of that end? Justice!\
      There was no justice for men, for they were ever in the dark!\
\
      Or perhaps in his philosophy he thought: Better to be out of it\
      all! Better to have done with it, like this poor youth....\
\
      Some one touched him on the arm.\
\
      A tear started up and wetted his eyelash. \'93Well,\'94 he said, \'93I\'92m\
      no good here. I\'92d better be going. You\'92ll come to me as soon as\
      you can, Jo,\'94 and with his head bowed he went away.\
\
      It was young Jolyon\'92s turn to take his stand beside the dead man,\
      round whose fallen body he seemed to see all the Forsytes\
      breathless, and prostrated. The stroke had fallen too swiftly.\
\
      The forces underlying every tragedy\'97forces that take no denial,\
      working through cross currents to their ironical end, had met and\
      fused with a thunder-clap, flung out the victim, and flattened to\
      the ground all those that stood around.\
\
      Or so at all events young Jolyon seemed to see them, lying around\
      Bosinney\'92s body.\
\
      He asked the Inspector to tell him what had happened, and the\
      latter, like a man who does not every day get such a chance,\
      again detailed such facts as were known.\
\
      \'93There\'92s more here, sir, however,\'94 he said, \'93than meets the eye.\
      I don\'92t believe in suicide, nor in pure accident, myself. It\'92s\
      more likely I think that he was suffering under great stress of\
      mind, and took no notice of things about him. Perhaps you can\
      throw some light on these.\'94\
\
      He took from his pocket a little packet and laid it on the table.\
      Carefully undoing it, he revealed a lady\'92s handkerchief, pinned\
      through the folds with a pin of discoloured Venetian gold, the\
      stone of which had fallen from the socket. A scent of dried\
      violets rose to young Jolyon\'92s nostrils.\
\
      \'93Found in his breast pocket,\'94 said the Inspector; \'93the name has\
      been cut away!\'94\
\
      Young Jolyon with difficulty answered: \'93I\'92m afraid I cannot help\
      you!\'94 But vividly there rose before him the face he had seen\
      light up, so tremulous and glad, at Bosinney\'92s coming! Of her he\
      thought more than of his own daughter, more than of them all\'97of\
      her with the dark, soft glance, the delicate passive face,\
      waiting for the dead man, waiting even at that moment, perhaps,\
      still and patient in the sunlight.\
\
      He walked sorrowfully away from the hospital towards his father\'92s\
      house, reflecting that this death would break up the Forsyte\
      family. The stroke had indeed slipped past their defences into\
      the very wood of their tree. They might flourish to all\
      appearance as before, preserving a brave show before the eyes of\
      London, but the trunk was dead, withered by the same flash that\
      had stricken down Bosinney. And now the saplings would take its\
      place, each one a new custodian of the sense of property.\
\
      Good forest of Forsytes! thought young Jolyon\'97soundest timber of\
      our land!\
\
      Concerning the cause of this death\'97his family would doubtless\
      reject with vigour the suspicion of suicide, which was so\
      compromising! They would take it as an accident, a stroke of\
      fate. In their hearts they would even feel it an intervention of\
      Providence, a retribution\'97had not Bosinney endangered their two\
      most priceless possessions, the pocket and the hearth? And they\
      would talk of \'93that unfortunate accident of young Bosinney\'92s,\'94\
      but perhaps they would not talk\'97silence might be better!\
\
      As for himself, he regarded the bus-driver\'92s account of the\
      accident as of very little value. For no one so madly in love\
      committed suicide for want of money; nor was Bosinney the sort of\
      fellow to set much store by a financial crisis. And so he too,\
      rejected this theory of suicide, the dead man\'92s face rose too\
      clearly before him. Gone in the heyday of his summer\'97and to\
      believe thus that an accident had cut Bosinney off in the full\
      sweep of his passion was more than ever pitiful to young Jolyon.\
\
      Then came a vision of Soames\'92 home as it now was, and must be\
      hereafter. The streak of lightning had flashed its clear uncanny\
      gleam on bare bones with grinning spaces between, the disguising\
      flesh was gone....\
\
      In the dining-room at Stanhope Gate old Jolyon was sitting alone\
      when his son came in. He looked very wan in his great armchair.\
      And his eyes travelling round the walls with their pictures of\
      still life, and the masterpiece \'93Dutch fishing-boats at Sunset\'94\
      seemed as though passing their gaze over his life with its hopes,\
      its gains, its achievements.\
\
      \'93Ah! Jo!\'94 he said, \'93is that you? I\'92ve told poor little June. But\
      that\'92s not all of it. Are you going to Soames\'92? _She\'92s_ brought\
      it on herself, I suppose; but somehow I can\'92t bear to think of\
      her, shut up there\'97and all alone.\'94 And holding up his thin,\
      veined hand, he clenched it.\
\
\
      CHAPTER IX IRENE\'92S RETURN\
\
      After leaving James and old Jolyon in the mortuary of the\
      hospital, Soames hurried aimlessly along the streets.\
\
      The tragic event of Bosinney\'92s death altered the complexion of\
      everything. There was no longer the same feeling that to lose a\
      minute would be fatal, nor would he now risk communicating the\
      fact of his wife\'92s flight to anyone till the inquest was over.\
\
      That morning he had risen early, before the postman came, had\
      taken the first-post letters from the box himself, and, though\
      there had been none from Irene, he had made an opportunity of\
      telling Bilson that her mistress was at the sea; he would\
      probably, he said, be going down himself from Saturday to Monday.\
      This had given him time to breathe, time to leave no stone\
      unturned to find her.\
\
      But now, cut off from taking steps by Bosinney\'92s death\'97that\
      strange death, to think of which was like putting a hot iron to\
      his heart, like lifting a great weight from it\'97he did not know\
      how to pass his day; and he wandered here and there through the\
      streets, looking at every face he met, devoured by a hundred\
      anxieties.\
\
      And as he wandered, he thought of him who had finished his\
      wandering, his prowling, and would never haunt his house again.\
\
      Already in the afternoon he passed posters announcing the\
      identity of the dead man, and bought the papers to see what they\
      said. He would stop their mouths if he could, and he went into\
      the City, and was closeted with Boulter for a long time.\
\
      On his way home, passing the steps of Jobson\'92s about half past\
      four, he met George Forsyte, who held out an evening paper to\
      Soames, saying:\
\
      \'93Here! Have you seen this about the poor Buccaneer?\'94\
\
      Soames answered stonily: \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      George stared at him. He had never liked Soames; he now held him\
      responsible for Bosinney\'92s death. Soames had done for him\'97done\
      for him by that act of property that had sent the Buccaneer to\
      run amok that fatal afternoon.\
\
      \'93The poor fellow,\'94 he was thinking, \'93was so cracked with\
      jealousy, so cracked for his vengeance, that he heard nothing of\
      the omnibus in that infernal fog.\'94\
\
      Soames had done for him! And this judgment was in George\'92s eyes.\
\
      \'93They talk of suicide here,\'94 he said at last. \'93_That_ cat won\'92t\
      jump.\'94\
\
      Soames shook his head. \'93An accident,\'94 he muttered.\
\
      Clenching his fist on the paper, George crammed it into his\
      pocket. He could not resist a parting shot.\
\
      \'93H\'92mm! All flourishing at home? Any little Soameses yet?\'94\
\
      With a face as white as the steps of Jobson\'92s, and a lip raised\
      as if snarling, Soames brushed past him and was gone....\
\
      On reaching home, and entering the little lighted hall with his\
      latchkey, the first thing that caught his eye was his wife\'92s\
      gold-mounted umbrella lying on the rug chest. Flinging off his\
      fur coat, he hurried to the drawing-room.\
\
      The curtains were drawn for the night, a bright fire of\
      cedar-logs burned in the grate, and by its light he saw Irene\
      sitting in her usual corner on the sofa. He shut the door softly,\
      and went towards her. She did not move, and did not seem to see\
      him.\
\
      \'93So you\'92ve come back?\'94 he said. \'93Why are you sitting here in the\
      dark?\'94\
\
      Then he caught sight of her face, so white and motionless that it\
      seemed as though the blood must have stopped flowing in her\
      veins; and her eyes, that looked enormous, like the great, wide,\
      startled brown eyes of an owl.\
\
      Huddled in her grey fur against the sofa cushions, she had a\
      strange resemblance to a captive owl, bunched in its soft\
      feathers against the wires of a cage. The supple erectness of her\
      figure was gone, as though she had been broken by cruel exercise;\
      as though there were no longer any reason for being beautiful,\
      and supple, and erect.\
\
      \'93So you\'92ve come back,\'94 he repeated.\
\
      She never looked up, and never spoke, the firelight playing over\
      her motionless figure.\
\
      Suddenly she tried to rise, but he prevented her; it was then\
      that he understood.\
\
      She had come back like an animal wounded to death, not knowing\
      where to turn, not knowing what she was doing. The sight of her\
      figure, huddled in the fur, was enough.\
\
      He knew then for certain that Bosinney had been her lover; knew\
      that she had seen the report of his death\'97perhaps, like himself,\
      had bought a paper at the draughty corner of a street, and read\
      it.\
\
      She had come back then of her own accord, to the cage she had\
      pined to be free of\'97and taking in all the tremendous significance\
      of this, he longed to cry: \'93Take your hated body, that I love,\
      out of my house! Take away that pitiful white face, so cruel and\
      soft\'97before I crush it. Get out of my sight; never let me see you\
      again!\'94\
\
      And, at those unspoken words, he seemed to see her rise and move\
      away, like a woman in a terrible dream, from which she was\
      fighting to awake\'97rise and go out into the dark and cold, without\
      a thought of him, without so much as the knowledge of his\
      presence.\
\
      Then he cried, contradicting what he had not yet spoken, \'93No;\
      stay there!\'94 And turning away from her, he sat down in his\
      accustomed chair on the other side of the hearth.\
\
      They sat in silence.\
\
      And Soames thought: \'93Why is all this? Why should I suffer so?\
      What have I done? It is not my fault!\'94\
\
      Again he looked at her, huddled like a bird that is shot and\
      dying, whose poor breast you see panting as the air is taken from\
      it, whose poor eyes look at you who have shot it, with a slow,\
      soft, unseeing look, taking farewell of all that is good\'97of the\
      sun, and the air, and its mate.\
\
      So they sat, by the firelight, in the silence, one on each side\
      of the hearth.\
\
      And the fume of the burning cedar logs, that he loved so well,\
      seemed to grip Soames by the throat till he could bear it no\
      longer. And going out into the hall he flung the door wide, to\
      gulp down the cold air that came in; then without hat or overcoat\
      went out into the Square.\
\
      Along the garden rails a half-starved cat came rubbing her way\
      towards him, and Soames thought: \'93Suffering! when will it cease,\
      my suffering?\'94\
\
      At a front door across the way was a man of his acquaintance\
      named Rutter, scraping his boots, with an air of \'93I am master\
      here.\'94 And Soames walked on.\
\
      From far in the clear air the bells of the church where he and\
      Irene had been married were pealing in \'93practice\'94 for the advent\
      of Christ, the chimes ringing out above the sound of traffic. He\
      felt a craving for strong drink, to lull him to indifference, or\
      rouse him to fury. If only he could burst out of himself, out of\
      this web that for the first time in his life he felt around him.\
      If only he could surrender to the thought: \'93Divorce her\'97turn her\
      out! She has forgotten you. Forget her!\'94\
\
      If only he could surrender to the thought: \'93Let her go\'97she has\
      suffered enough!\'94\
\
      If only he could surrender to the desire: \'93Make a slave of\
      her\'97she is in your power!\'94\
\
      If only even he could surrender to the sudden vision: \'93What does\
      it all matter?\'94 Forget himself for a minute, forget that it\
      mattered what he did, forget that whatever he did he must\
      sacrifice something.\
\
      If only he could act on an impulse!\
\
      He could forget nothing; surrender to no thought, vision, or\
      desire; it was all too serious; too close around him, an\
      unbreakable cage.\
\
      On the far side of the Square newspaper boys were calling their\
      evening wares, and the ghoulish cries mingled and jangled with\
      the sound of those church bells.\
\
      Soames covered his ears. The thought flashed across him that but\
      for a chance, he himself, and not Bosinney, might be lying dead,\
      and she, instead of crouching there like a shot bird with those\
      dying eyes....\
\
      Something soft touched his legs, the cat was rubbing herself\
      against them. And a sob that shook him from head to foot burst\
      from Soames\'92 chest. Then all was still again in the dark, where\
      the houses seemed to stare at him, each with a master and\
      mistress of its own, and a secret story of happiness or sorrow.\
\
      And suddenly he saw that his own door was open, and black against\
      the light from the hall a man standing with his back turned.\
      Something slid too in his breast, and he stole up close behind.\
\
      He could see his own fur coat flung across the carved oak chair;\
      the Persian rugs; the silver bowls, the rows of porcelain plates\
      arranged along the walls, and this unknown man who was standing\
      there.\
\
      And sharply he asked: \'93What is it you want, sir?\'94\
\
      The visitor turned. It was young Jolyon.\
\
      \'93The door was open,\'94 he said. \'93Might I see your wife for a\
      minute, I have a message for her?\'94\
\
      Soames gave him a strange, sidelong stare.\
\
      \'93My wife can see no one,\'94 he muttered doggedly.\
\
      Young Jolyon answered gently: \'93I shouldn\'92t keep her a minute.\'94\
\
      Soames brushed by him and barred the way.\
\
      \'93She can see no one,\'94 he said again.\
\
      Young Jolyon\'92s glance shot past him into the hall, and Soames\
      turned. There in the drawing-room doorway stood Irene, her eyes\
      were wild and eager, her lips were parted, her hands\
      outstretched. In the sight of both men that light vanished from\
      her face; her hands dropped to her sides; she stood like stone.\
\
      Soames spun round, and met his visitor\'92s eyes, and at the look he\
      saw in them, a sound like a snarl escaped him. He drew his lips\
      back in the ghost of a smile.\
\
      \'93This is my house,\'94 he said; \'93I manage my own affairs. I\'92ve told\
      you once\'97I tell you again; we are not at home.\'94\
\
      And in young Jolyon\'92s face he slammed the door.\
\
\
      titlpage2 (51K)\
\
\
\
      frontis2 (109K)\
\
\
\
\
      THE FORSYTE SAGA\'97VOLUME II\
\
      By John Galsworthy\
\
      TO ANDR\'c9 CHEVRILLON\
\
\
      INDIAN SUMMER OF A FORSYTE\
\
\'93And Summer\'92s lease hath all too short a date.\'94\
                    \'97Shakespeare\
\
\
\
\
      I\
\
\
      In the last day of May in the early \'92nineties, about six o\'92clock\
      of the evening, old Jolyon Forsyte sat under the oak tree below\
      the terrace of his house at Robin Hill. He was waiting for the\
      midges to bite him, before abandoning the glory of the afternoon.\
      His thin brown hand, where blue veins stood out, held the end of\
      a cigar in its tapering, long-nailed fingers\'97a pointed polished\
      nail had survived with him from those earlier Victorian days when\
      to touch nothing, even with the tips of the fingers, had been so\
      distinguished. His domed forehead, great white moustache, lean\
      cheeks, and long lean jaw were covered from the westering\
      sunshine by an old brown Panama hat. His legs were crossed; in\
      all his attitude was serenity and a kind of elegance, as of an\
      old man who every morning put eau de Cologne upon his silk\
      handkerchief. At his feet lay a woolly brown-and-white dog trying\
      to be a Pomeranian\'97the dog Balthasar between whom and old Jolyon\
      primal aversion had changed into attachment with the years. Close\
      to his chair was a swing, and on the swing was seated one of\
      Holly\'92s dolls\'97called \'93Duffer Alice\'94\'97with her body fallen over her\
      legs and her doleful nose buried in a black petticoat. She was\
      never out of disgrace, so it did not matter to her how she sat.\
      Below the oak tree the lawn dipped down a bank, stretched to the\
      fernery, and, beyond that refinement, became fields, dropping to\
      the pond, the coppice, and the prospect\'97\'93Fine, remarkable\'94\'97at\
      which Swithin Forsyte, from under this very tree, had stared five\
      years ago when he drove down with Irene to look at the house. Old\
      Jolyon had heard of his brother\'92s exploit\'97that drive which had\
      become quite celebrated on Forsyte \'92Change. Swithin! And the\
      fellow had gone and died, last November, at the age of only\
      seventy-nine, renewing the doubt whether Forsytes could live for\
      ever, which had first arisen when Aunt Ann passed away. Died! and\
      left only Jolyon and James, Roger and Nicholas and Timothy,\
      Julia, Hester, Susan! And old Jolyon thought: \'93Eighty-five! I\
      don\'92t feel it\'97except when I get that pain.\'94\
\
      His memory went searching. He had not felt his age since he had\
      bought his nephew Soames\'92 ill-starred house and settled into it\
      here at Robin Hill over three years ago. It was as if he had been\
      getting younger every spring, living in the country with his son\
      and his grandchildren\'97June, and the little ones of the second\
      marriage, Jolly and Holly; living down here out of the racket of\
      London and the cackle of Forsyte \'92Change, free of his boards, in\
      a delicious atmosphere of no work and all play, with plenty of\
      occupation in the perfecting and mellowing of the house and its\
      twenty acres, and in ministering to the whims of Holly and Jolly.\
      All the knots and crankiness, which had gathered in his heart\
      during that long and tragic business of June, Soames, Irene his\
      wife, and poor young Bosinney, had been smoothed out. Even June\
      had thrown off her melancholy at last\'97witness this travel in\
      Spain she was taking now with her father and her stepmother.\
      Curiously perfect peace was left by their departure; blissful,\
      yet blank, because his son was not there. Jo was never anything\
      but a comfort and a pleasure to him nowadays\'97an amiable chap; but\
      women, somehow\'97even the best\'97got a little on one\'92s nerves, unless\
      of course one admired them.\
\
      Far-off a cuckoo called; a wood-pigeon was cooing from the first\
      elm-tree in the field, and how the daisies and buttercups had\
      sprung up after the last mowing! The wind had got into the sou\'92\
      west, too\'97a delicious air, sappy! He pushed his hat back and let\
      the sun fall on his chin and cheek. Somehow, to-day, he wanted\
      company\'97wanted a pretty face to look at. People treated the old\
      as if they wanted nothing. And with the un-Forsytean philosophy\
      which ever intruded on his soul, he thought: \'93One\'92s never had\
      enough. With a foot in the grave one\'92ll want something, I\
      shouldn\'92t be surprised!\'94 Down here\'97away from the exigencies of\
      affairs\'97his grandchildren, and the flowers, trees, birds of his\
      little domain, to say nothing of sun and moon and stars above\
      them, said, \'93Open, sesame,\'94 to him day and night. And sesame had\
      opened\'97how much, perhaps, he did not know. He had always been\
      responsive to what they had begun to call \'93Nature,\'94 genuinely,\
      almost religiously responsive, though he had never lost his habit\
      of calling a sunset a sunset and a view a view, however deeply\
      they might move him. But nowadays Nature actually made him ache,\
      he appreciated it so. Every one of these calm, bright,\
      lengthening days, with Holly\'92s hand in his, and the dog Balthasar\
      in front looking studiously for what he never found, he would\
      stroll, watching the roses open, fruit budding on the walls,\
      sunlight brightening the oak leaves and saplings in the coppice,\
      watching the water-lily leaves unfold and glisten, and the\
      silvery young corn of the one wheat field; listening to the\
      starlings and skylarks, and the Alderney cows chewing the cud,\
      flicking slow their tufted tails; and every one of these fine\
      days he ached a little from sheer love of it all, feeling\
      perhaps, deep down, that he had not very much longer to enjoy it.\
      The thought that some day\'97perhaps not ten years hence, perhaps\
      not five\'97all this world would be taken away from him, before he\
      had exhausted his powers of loving it, seemed to him in the\
      nature of an injustice brooding over his horizon. If anything\
      came after this life, it wouldn\'92t be what he wanted; not Robin\
      Hill, and flowers and birds and pretty faces\'97too few, even now,\
      of those about him! With the years his dislike of humbug had\
      increased; the orthodoxy he had worn in the \'92sixties, as he had\
      worn side-whiskers out of sheer exuberance, had long dropped off,\
      leaving him reverent before three things alone\'97beauty, upright\
      conduct, and the sense of property; and the greatest of these now\
      was beauty. He had always had wide interests, and, indeed could\
      still read _The Times_, but he was liable at any moment to put it\
      down if he heard a blackbird sing. Upright conduct,\
      property\'97somehow, they were tiring; the blackbirds and the\
      sunsets never tired him, only gave him an uneasy feeling that he\
      could not get enough of them. Staring into the stilly radiance of\
      the early evening and at the little gold and white flowers on the\
      lawn, a thought came to him: This weather was like the music of\
      \'93Orfeo,\'94 which he had recently heard at Covent Garden. A\
      beautiful opera, not like Meyerbeer, nor even quite Mozart, but,\
      in its way, perhaps even more lovely; something classical and of\
      the Golden Age about it, chaste and mellow, and the Ravogli\
      \'93almost worthy of the old days\'94\'97highest praise he could bestow.\
      The yearning of Orpheus for the beauty he was losing, for his\
      love going down to Hades, as in life love and beauty did go\'97the\
      yearning which sang and throbbed through the golden music,\
      stirred also in the lingering beauty of the world that evening.\
      And with the tip of his cork-soled, elastic-sided boot he\
      involuntarily stirred the ribs of the dog Balthasar, causing the\
      animal to wake and attack his fleas; for though he was supposed\
      to have none, nothing could persuade him of the fact. When he had\
      finished he rubbed the place he had been scratching against his\
      master\'92s calf, and settled down again with his chin over the\
      instep of the disturbing boot. And into old Jolyon\'92s mind came a\
      sudden recollection\'97a face he had seen at that opera three weeks\
      ago\'97Irene, the wife of his precious nephew Soames, that man of\
      property! Though he had not met her since the day of the \'93At\
      Home\'94 in his old house at Stanhope Gate, which celebrated his\
      granddaughter June\'92s ill-starred engagement to young Bosinney, he\
      had remembered her at once, for he had always admired her\'97a very\
      pretty creature. After the death of young Bosinney, whose\
      mistress she had so reprehensibly become, he had heard that she\
      had left Soames at once. Goodness only knew what she had been\
      doing since. That sight of her face\'97a side view\'97in the row in\
      front, had been literally the only reminder these three years\
      that she was still alive. No one ever spoke of her. And yet Jo\
      had told him something once\'97something which had upset him\
      completely. The boy had got it from George Forsyte, he believed,\
      who had seen Bosinney in the fog the day he was run\
      over\'97something which explained the young fellow\'92s distress\'97an act\
      of Soames towards his wife\'97a shocking act. Jo had seen her, too,\
      that afternoon, after the news was out, seen her for a moment,\
      and his description had always lingered in old Jolyon\'92s\
      mind\'97\'93wild and lost\'94 he had called her. And next day June had\
      gone there\'97bottled up her feelings and gone there, and the maid\
      had cried and told her how her mistress had slipped out in the\
      night and vanished. A tragic business altogether! One thing was\
      certain\'97Soames had never been able to lay hands on her again. And\
      he was living at Brighton, and journeying up and down\'97a fitting\
      fate, the man of property! For when he once took a dislike to\
      anyone\'97as he had to his nephew\'97old Jolyon never got over it. He\
      remembered still the sense of relief with which he had heard the\
      news of Irene\'92s disappearance. It had been shocking to think of\
      her a prisoner in that house to which she must have wandered\
      back, when Jo saw her, wandered back for a moment\'97like a wounded\
      animal to its hole after seeing that news, \'93Tragic death of an\
      Architect,\'94 in the street. Her face had struck him very much the\
      other night\'97more beautiful than he had remembered, but like a\
      mask, with something going on beneath it. A young woman\
      still\'97twenty-eight perhaps. Ah, well! Very likely she had another\
      lover by now. But at this subversive thought\'97for married women\
      should never love: once, even, had been too much\'97his instep rose,\
      and with it the dog Balthasar\'92s head. The sagacious animal stood\
      up and looked into old Jolyon\'92s face. \'93Walk?\'94 he seemed to say;\
      and old Jolyon answered: \'93Come on, old chap!\'94\
\
      Slowly, as was their wont, they crossed among the constellations\
      of buttercups and daisies, and entered the fernery. This feature,\
      where very little grew as yet, had been judiciously dropped below\
      the level of the lawn so that it might come up again on the level\
      of the other lawn and give the impression of irregularity, so\
      important in horticulture. Its rocks and earth were beloved of\
      the dog Balthasar, who sometimes found a mole there. Old Jolyon\
      made a point of passing through it because, though it was not\
      beautiful, he intended that it should be, some day, and he would\
      think: \'93I must get Varr to come down and look at it; he\'92s better\
      than Beech.\'94 For plants, like houses and human complaints,\
      required the best expert consideration. It was inhabited by\
      snails, and if accompanied by his grandchildren, he would point\
      to one and tell them the story of the little boy who said: \'93Have\
      plummers got leggers, Mother?\'94 \'93No, sonny.\'94 \'93Then darned if I\
      haven\'92t been and swallowed a snileybob.\'94 And when they skipped\
      and clutched his hand, thinking of the snileybob going down the\
      little boy\'92s \'93red lane,\'94 his eyes would twinkle. Emerging from\
      the fernery, he opened the wicket gate, which just there led into\
      the first field, a large and park-like area, out of which, within\
      brick walls, the vegetable garden had been carved. Old Jolyon\
      avoided this, which did not suit his mood, and made down the hill\
      towards the pond. Balthasar, who knew a water-rat or two,\
      gambolled in front, at the gait which marks an oldish dog who\
      takes the same walk every day. Arrived at the edge, old Jolyon\
      stood, noting another water-lily opened since yesterday; he would\
      show it to Holly to-morrow, when \'93his little sweet\'94 had got over\
      the upset which had followed on her eating a tomato at lunch\'97her\
      little arrangements were very delicate. Now that Jolly had gone\
      to school\'97his first term\'97Holly was with him nearly all day long,\
      and he missed her badly. He felt that pain too, which often\
      bothered him now, a little dragging at his left side. He looked\
      back up the hill. Really, poor young Bosinney had made an\
      uncommonly good job of the house; he would have done very well\
      for himself if he had lived! And where was he now? Perhaps, still\
      haunting this, the site of his last work, of his tragic love\
      affair. Or was Philip Bosinney\'92s spirit diffused in the general?\
      Who could say? That dog was getting his legs muddy! And he moved\
      towards the coppice. There had been the most delightful lot of\
      bluebells, and he knew where some still lingered like little\
      patches of sky fallen in between the trees, away out of the sun.\
      He passed the cow-houses and the hen-houses there installed, and\
      pursued a path into the thick of the saplings, making for one of\
      the bluebell plots. Balthasar, preceding him once more, uttered a\
      low growl. Old Jolyon stirred him with his foot, but the dog\
      remained motionless, just where there was no room to pass, and\
      the hair rose slowly along the centre of his woolly back. Whether\
      from the growl and the look of the dog\'92s stivered hair, or from\
      the sensation which a man feels in a wood, old Jolyon also felt\
      something move along his spine. And then the path turned, and\
      there was an old mossy log, and on it a woman sitting. Her face\
      was turned away, and he had just time to think: \'93She\'92s\
      trespassing\'97I must have a board put up!\'94 before she turned.\
      Powers above! The face he had seen at the opera\'97the very woman he\
      had just been thinking of! In that confused moment he saw things\
      blurred, as if a spirit\'97queer effect\'97the slant of sunlight\
      perhaps on her violet-grey frock! And then she rose and stood\
      smiling, her head a little to one side. Old Jolyon thought: \'93How\
      pretty she is!\'94 She did not speak, neither did he; and he\
      realized why with a certain admiration. She was here no doubt\
      because of some memory, and did not mean to try and get out of it\
      by vulgar explanation.\
\
      \'93Don\'92t let that dog touch your frock,\'94 he said; \'93he\'92s got wet\
      feet. Come here, you!\'94\
\
      But the dog Balthasar went on towards the visitor, who put her\
      hand down and stroked his head. Old Jolyon said quickly:\
\
      \'93I saw you at the opera the other night; you didn\'92t notice me.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, yes! I did.\'94\
\
      He felt a subtle flattery in that, as though she had added: \'93Do\
      you think one could miss seeing you?\'94\
\
      \'93They\'92re all in Spain,\'94 he remarked abruptly. \'93I\'92m alone; I drove\
      up for the opera. The Ravogli\'92s good. Have you seen the\
      cow-houses?\'94\
\
      In a situation so charged with mystery and something very like\
      emotion he moved instinctively towards that bit of property, and\
      she moved beside him. Her figure swayed faintly, like the best\
      kind of French figures; her dress, too, was a sort of French\
      grey. He noticed two or three silver threads in her\
      amber-coloured hair, strange hair with those dark eyes of hers,\
      and that creamy-pale face. A sudden sidelong look from the\
      velvety brown eyes disturbed him. It seemed to come from deep and\
      far, from another world almost, or at all events from some one\
      not living very much in this. And he said mechanically:\
\
      \'93Where are you living now?\'94\
\
      \'93I have a little flat in Chelsea.\'94\
\
      He did not want to hear what she was doing, did not want to hear\
      anything; but the perverse word came out:\
\
      \'93Alone?\'94\
\
      She nodded. It was a relief to know that. And it came into his\
      mind that, but for a twist of fate, she would have been mistress\
      of this coppice, showing these cow-houses to him, a visitor.\
\
      \'93All Alderneys,\'94 he muttered; \'93they give the best milk. This\
      one\'92s a pretty creature. Woa, Myrtle!\'94\
\
      The fawn-coloured cow, with eyes as soft and brown as Irene\'92s\
      own, was standing absolutely still, not having long been milked.\
      She looked round at them out of the corner of those lustrous,\
      mild, cynical eyes, and from her grey lips a little dribble of\
      saliva threaded its way towards the straw. The scent of hay and\
      vanilla and ammonia rose in the dim light of the cool cow-house;\
      and old Jolyon said:\
\
      \'93You must come up and have some dinner with me. I\'92ll send you\
      home in the carriage.\'94\
\
      He perceived a struggle going on within her; natural, no doubt,\
      with her memories. But he wanted her company; a pretty face, a\
      charming figure, beauty! He had been alone all the afternoon.\
      Perhaps his eyes were wistful, for she answered: \'93Thank you,\
      Uncle Jolyon. I should like to.\'94\
\
      He rubbed his hands, and said:\
\
      \'93Capital! Let\'92s go up, then!\'94 And, preceded by the dog Balthasar,\
      they ascended through the field. The sun was almost level in\
      their faces now, and he could see, not only those silver threads,\
      but little lines, just deep enough to stamp her beauty with a\
      coin-like fineness\'97the special look of life unshared with others.\
      \'93I\'92ll take her in by the terrace,\'94 he thought: \'93I won\'92t make a\
      common visitor of her.\'94\
\
      \'93What do you do all day?\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93Teach music; I have another interest, too.\'94\
\
      \'93Work!\'94 said old Jolyon, picking up the doll from off the swing,\
      and smoothing its black petticoat. \'93Nothing like it, is there? I\
      don\'92t do any now. I\'92m getting on. What interest is that?\'94\
\
      \'93Trying to help women who\'92ve come to grief.\'94 Old Jolyon did not\
      quite understand. \'93To grief?\'94 he repeated; then realised with a\
      shock that she meant exactly what he would have meant himself if\
      he had used that expression. Assisting the Magdalenes of London!\
      What a weird and terrifying interest! And, curiosity overcoming\
      his natural shrinking, he asked:\
\
      \'93Why? What do you do for them?\'94\
\
      \'93Not much. I\'92ve no money to spare. I can only give sympathy and\
      food sometimes.\'94\
\
      Involuntarily old Jolyon\'92s hand sought his purse. He said\
      hastily: \'93How d\'92you get hold of them?\'94\
\
      \'93I go to a hospital.\'94\
\
      \'93A hospital! Phew!\'94\
\
      \'93What hurts me most is that once they nearly all had some sort of\
      beauty.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon straightened the doll. \'93Beauty!\'94 he ejaculated: \'93Ha!\
      Yes! A sad business!\'94 and he moved towards the house. Through a\
      French window, under sun-blinds not yet drawn up, he preceded her\
      into the room where he was wont to study _The Times_ and the\
      sheets of an agricultural magazine, with huge illustrations of\
      mangold wurzels, and the like, which provided Holly with material\
      for her paint brush.\
\
      \'93Dinner\'92s in half an hour. You\'92d like to wash your hands! I\'92ll\
      take you to June\'92s room.\'94\
\
      He saw her looking round eagerly; what changes since she had last\
      visited this house with her husband, or her lover, or both\
      perhaps\'97he did not know, could not say! All that was dark, and he\
      wished to leave it so. But what changes! And in the hall he said:\
\
      \'93My boy Jo\'92s a painter, you know. He\'92s got a lot of taste. It\
      isn\'92t mine, of course, but I\'92ve let him have his way.\'94\
\
      She was standing very still, her eyes roaming through the hall\
      and music room, as it now was\'97all thrown into one, under the\
      great skylight. Old Jolyon had an odd impression of her. Was she\
      trying to conjure somebody from the shades of that space where\
      the colouring was all pearl-grey and silver? He would have had\
      gold himself; more lively and solid. But Jo had French tastes,\
      and it had come out shadowy like that, with an effect as of the\
      fume of cigarettes the chap was always smoking, broken here and\
      there by a little blaze of blue or crimson colour. It was not\
      _his_ dream! Mentally he had hung this space with those\
      gold-framed masterpieces of still and stiller life which he had\
      bought in days when quantity was precious. And now where were\
      they? Sold for a song! That something which made him, alone among\
      Forsytes, move with the times had warned him against the struggle\
      to retain them. But in his study he still had \'93Dutch Fishing\
      Boats at Sunset.\'94\
\
      He began to mount the stairs with her, slowly, for he felt his\
      side.\
\
      \'93These are the bathrooms,\'94 he said, \'93and other arrangements. I\'92ve\
      had them tiled. The nurseries are along there. And this is Jo\'92s\
      and his wife\'92s. They all communicate. But you remember, I\
      expect.\'94\
\
      Irene nodded. They passed on, up the gallery and entered a large\
      room with a small bed, and several windows.\
\
      \'93This is mine,\'94 he said. The walls were covered with the\
      photographs of children and watercolour sketches, and he added\
      doubtfully:\
\
      \'93These are Jo\'92s. The view\'92s first-rate. You can see the Grand\
      Stand at Epsom in clear weather.\'94\
\
      The sun was down now, behind the house, and over the \'93prospect\'94 a\
      luminous haze had settled, emanation of the long and prosperous\
      day. Few houses showed, but fields and trees faintly glistened,\
      away to a loom of downs.\
\
      \'93The country\'92s changing,\'94 he said abruptly, \'93but there it\'92ll be\
      when we\'92re all gone. Look at those thrushes\'97the birds are sweet\
      here in the mornings. I\'92m glad to have washed my hands of\
      London.\'94\
\
      Her face was close to the window pane, and he was struck by its\
      mournful look. \'93Wish I could make her look happy!\'94 he thought. \'93A\
      pretty face, but sad!\'94 And taking up his can of hot water he went\
      out into the gallery.\
\
      \'93This is June\'92s room,\'94 he said, opening the next door and putting\
      the can down; \'93I think you\'92ll find everything.\'94 And closing the\
      door behind her he went back to his own room. Brushing his hair\
      with his great ebony brushes, and dabbing his forehead with eau\
      de Cologne, he mused. She had come so strangely\'97a sort of\
      visitation; mysterious, even romantic, as if his desire for\
      company, for beauty, had been fulfilled by whatever it was which\
      fulfilled that sort of thing. And before the mirror he\
      straightened his still upright figure, passed the brushes over\
      his great white moustache, touched up his eyebrows with eau de\
      Cologne, and rang the bell.\
\
      \'93I forgot to let them know that I have a lady to dinner with me.\
      Let cook do something extra, and tell Beacon to have the landau\
      and pair at half-past ten to drive her back to Town to-night. Is\
      Miss Holly asleep?\'94\
\
      The maid thought not. And old Jolyon, passing down the gallery,\
      stole on tiptoe towards the nursery, and opened the door whose\
      hinges he kept specially oiled that he might slip in and out in\
      the evenings without being heard.\
\
      But Holly _was_ asleep, and lay like a miniature Madonna, of that\
      type which the old painters could not tell from Venus, when they\
      had completed her. Her long dark lashes clung to her cheeks; on\
      her face was perfect peace\'97her little arrangements were evidently\
      all right again. And old Jolyon, in the twilight of the room,\
      stood adoring her! It was so charming, solemn, and loving\'97that\
      little face. He had more than his share of the blessed capacity\
      of living again in the young. They were to him his future\
      life\'97all of a future life that his fundamental pagan sanity\
      perhaps admitted. There she was with everything before her, and\
      his blood\'97some of it\'97in her tiny veins. There she was, his little\
      companion, to be made as happy as ever he could make her, so that\
      she knew nothing but love. His heart swelled, and he went out,\
      stilling the sound of his patent-leather boots. In the corridor\
      an eccentric notion attacked him: To think that children should\
      come to that which Irene had told him she was helping! Women who\
      were all, once, little things like this one sleeping there! \'93I\
      must give her a cheque!\'94 he mused; \'93Can\'92t bear to think of them!\'94\
      They had never borne reflecting on, those poor outcasts; wounding\
      too deeply the core of true refinement hidden under layers of\
      conformity to the sense of property\'97wounding too grievously the\
      deepest thing in him\'97a love of beauty which could give him, even\
      now, a flutter of the heart, thinking of his evening in the\
      society of a pretty woman. And he went downstairs, through the\
      swinging doors, to the back regions. There, in the wine-cellar,\
      was a hock worth at least two pounds a bottle, a Steinberg\
      Cabinet, better than any Johannisberg that ever went down throat;\
      a wine of perfect bouquet, sweet as a nectarine\'97nectar indeed! He\
      got a bottle out, handling it like a baby, and holding it level\
      to the light, to look. Enshrined in its coat of dust, that mellow\
      coloured, slender-necked bottle gave him deep pleasure. Three\
      years to settle down again since the move from Town\'97ought to be\
      in prime condition! Thirty-five years ago he had bought it\'97thank\
      God he had kept his palate, and earned the right to drink it. She\
      would appreciate this; not a spice of acidity in a dozen. He\
      wiped the bottle, drew the cork with his own hands, put his nose\
      down, inhaled its perfume, and went back to the music room.\
\
      Irene was standing by the piano; she had taken off her hat and a\
      lace scarf she had been wearing, so that her gold-coloured hair\
      was visible, and the pallor of her neck. In her grey frock she\
      made a pretty picture for old Jolyon, against the rosewood of the\
      piano.\
\
      He gave her his arm, and solemnly they went. The room, which had\
      been designed to enable twenty-four people to dine in comfort,\
      held now but a little round table. In his present solitude the\
      big dining-table oppressed old Jolyon; he had caused it to be\
      removed till his son came back. Here in the company of two really\
      good copies of Raphael Madonnas he was wont to dine alone. It was\
      the only disconsolate hour of his day, this summer weather. He\
      had never been a large eater, like that great chap Swithin, or\
      Sylvanus Heythorp, or Anthony Thornworthy, those cronies of past\
      times; and to dine alone, overlooked by the Madonnas, was to him\
      but a sorrowful occupation, which he got through quickly, that he\
      might come to the more spiritual enjoyment of his coffee and\
      cigar. But this evening was a different matter! His eyes twinkled\
      at her across the little table and he spoke of Italy and\
      Switzerland, telling her stories of his travels there, and other\
      experiences which he could no longer recount to his son and\
      grand-daughter because they knew them. This fresh audience was\
      precious to him; he had never become one of those old men who\
      ramble round and round the fields of reminiscence. Himself\
      quickly fatigued by the insensitive, he instinctively avoided\
      fatiguing others, and his natural flirtatiousness towards beauty\
      guarded him specially in his relations with a woman. He would\
      have liked to draw her out, but though she murmured and smiled\
      and seemed to be enjoying what he told her, he remained conscious\
      of that mysterious remoteness which constituted half her\
      fascination. He could not bear women who threw their shoulders\
      and eyes at you, and chattered away; or hard-mouthed women who\
      laid down the law and knew more than you did. There was only one\
      quality in a woman that appealed to him\'97charm; and the quieter it\
      was, the more he liked it. And this one had charm, shadowy as\
      afternoon sunlight on those Italian hills and valleys he had\
      loved. The feeling, too, that she was, as it were, apart,\
      cloistered, made her seem nearer to himself, a strangely\
      desirable companion. When a man is very old and quite out of the\
      running, he loves to feel secure from the rivalries of youth, for\
      he would still be first in the heart of beauty. And he drank his\
      hock, and watched her lips, and felt nearly young. But the dog\
      Balthasar lay watching her lips too, and despising in his heart\
      the interruptions of their talk, and the tilting of those\
      greenish glasses full of a golden fluid which was distasteful to\
      him.\
\
      The light was just failing when they went back into the\
      music-room. And, cigar in mouth, old Jolyon said:\
\
      \'93Play me some Chopin.\'94\
\
      By the cigars they smoke, and the composers they love, ye shall\
      know the texture of men\'92s souls. Old Jolyon could not bear a\
      strong cigar or Wagner\'92s music. He loved Beethoven and Mozart,\
      Handel and Gluck, and Schumann, and, for some occult reason, the\
      operas of Meyerbeer; but of late years he had been seduced by\
      Chopin, just as in painting he had succumbed to Botticelli. In\
      yielding to these tastes he had been conscious of divergence from\
      the standard of the Golden Age. Their poetry was not that of\
      Milton and Byron and Tennyson; of Raphael and Titian; Mozart and\
      Beethoven. It was, as it were, behind a veil; their poetry hit no\
      one in the face, but slipped its fingers under the ribs and\
      turned and twisted, and melted up the heart. And, never certain\
      that this was healthy, he did not care a rap so long as he could\
      see the pictures of the one or hear the music of the other.\
\
      Irene sat down at the piano under the electric lamp festooned\
      with pearl-grey, and old Jolyon, in an armchair, whence he could\
      see her, crossed his legs and drew slowly at his cigar. She sat a\
      few moments with her hands on the keys, evidently searching her\
      mind for what to give him. Then she began and within old Jolyon\
      there arose a sorrowful pleasure, not quite like anything else in\
      the world. He fell slowly into a trance, interrupted only by the\
      movements of taking the cigar out of his mouth at long intervals,\
      and replacing it. She was there, and the hock within him, and the\
      scent of tobacco; but there, too, was a world of sunshine\
      lingering into moonlight, and pools with storks upon them, and\
      bluish trees above, glowing with blurs of wine-red roses, and\
      fields of lavender where milk-white cows were grazing, and a\
      woman all shadowy, with dark eyes and a white neck, smiled,\
      holding out her arms; and through air which was like music a star\
      dropped and was caught on a cow\'92s horn. He opened his eyes.\
      Beautiful piece; she played well\'97the touch of an angel! And he\
      closed them again. He felt miraculously sad and happy, as one\
      does, standing under a lime-tree in full honey flower. Not live\
      one\'92s own life again, but just stand there and bask in the smile\
      of a woman\'92s eyes, and enjoy the bouquet! And he jerked his hand;\
      the dog Balthasar had reached up and licked it.\
\
      \'93Beautiful!\'94 He said: \'93Go on\'97more Chopin!\'94\
\
      She began to play again. This time the resemblance between her\
      and \'93Chopin\'94 struck him. The swaying he had noticed in her walk\
      was in her playing too, and the Nocturne she had chosen and the\
      soft darkness of her eyes, the light on her hair, as of moonlight\
      from a golden moon. Seductive, yes; but nothing of Delilah in her\
      or in that music. A long blue spiral from his cigar ascended and\
      dispersed. \'93So we go out!\'94 he thought. \'93No more beauty! Nothing?\'94\
\
      Again Irene stopped.\
\
      \'93Would you like some Gluck? He used to write his music in a\
      sunlit garden, with a bottle of Rhine wine beside him.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah! yes. Let\'92s have \'91Orfeo.\'92\'94 Round about him now were fields of\
      gold and silver flowers, white forms swaying in the sunlight,\
      bright birds flying to and fro. All was summer. Lingering waves\
      of sweetness and regret flooded his soul. Some cigar ash dropped,\
      and taking out a silk handkerchief to brush it off, he inhaled a\
      mingled scent as of snuff and eau de Cologne. \'93Ah!\'94 he thought,\
      \'93Indian summer\'97that\'92s all!\'94 and he said: \'93You haven\'92t played me\
      \'91Che faro.\'92\'94\
\
      She did not answer; did not move. He was conscious of\
      something\'97some strange upset. Suddenly he saw her rise and turn\
      away, and a pang of remorse shot through him. What a clumsy chap!\
      Like Orpheus, she of course\'97she too was looking for her lost one\
      in the hall of memory! And disturbed to the heart, he got up from\
      his chair. She had gone to the great window at the far end.\
      Gingerly he followed. Her hands were folded over her breast; he\
      could just see her cheek, very white. And, quite emotionalized,\
      he said:\
\
      \'93There, there, my love!\'94 The words had escaped him mechanically,\
      for they were those he used to Holly when she had a pain, but\
      their effect was instantaneously distressing. She raised her\
      arms, covered her face with them, and wept.\
\
      Old Jolyon stood gazing at her with eyes very deep from age. The\
      passionate shame she seemed feeling at her abandonment, so unlike\
      the control and quietude of her whole presence was as if she had\
      never before broken down in the presence of another being.\
\
      \'93There, there\'97there, there!\'94 he murmured, and putting his hand\
      out reverently, touched her. She turned, and leaned the arms\
      which covered her face against him. Old Jolyon stood very still,\
      keeping one thin hand on her shoulder. Let her cry her heart\
      out\'97it would do her good.\
\
      And the dog Balthasar, puzzled, sat down on his stern to examine\
      them.\
\
      The window was still open, the curtains had not been drawn, the\
      last of daylight from without mingled with faint intrusion from\
      the lamp within; there was a scent of new-mown grass. With the\
      wisdom of a long life old Jolyon did not speak. Even grief sobbed\
      itself out in time; only Time was good for sorrow\'97Time who saw\
      the passing of each mood, each emotion in turn; Time the\
      layer-to-rest. There came into his mind the words: \'93As panteth\
      the hart after cooling streams\'94\'97but they were of no use to him.\
      Then, conscious of a scent of violets, he knew she was drying her\
      eyes. He put his chin forward, pressed his moustache against her\
      forehead, and felt her shake with a quivering of her whole body,\
      as of a tree which shakes itself free of raindrops. She put his\
      hand to her lips, as if saying: \'93All over now! Forgive me!\'94\
\
      The kiss filled him with a strange comfort; he led her back to\
      where she had been so upset. And the dog Balthasar, following,\
      laid the bone of one of the cutlets they had eaten at their feet.\
\
      Anxious to obliterate the memory of that emotion, he could think\
      of nothing better than china; and moving with her slowly from\
      cabinet to cabinet, he kept taking up bits of Dresden and\
      Lowestoft and Chelsea, turning them round and round with his\
      thin, veined hands, whose skin, faintly freckled, had such an\
      aged look.\
\
      \'93I bought this at Jobson\'92s,\'94 he would say; \'93cost me thirty\
      pounds. It\'92s very old. That dog leaves his bones all over the\
      place. This old \'91ship-bowl\'92 I picked up at the sale when that\
      precious rip, the Marquis, came to grief. But you don\'92t remember.\
      Here\'92s a nice piece of Chelsea. Now, what would you say _this_\
      was?\'94 And he was comforted, feeling that, with her taste, she was\
      taking a real interest in these things; for, after all, nothing\
      better composes the nerves than a doubtful piece of china.\
\
      When the crunch of the carriage wheels was heard at last, he\
      said:\
\
      \'93You must come again; you must come to lunch, then I can show you\
      these by daylight, and my little sweet\'97she\'92s a dear little thing.\
      This dog seems to have taken a fancy to you.\'94\
\
      For Balthasar, feeling that she was about to leave, was rubbing\
      his side against her leg. Going out under the porch with her, he\
      said:\
\
      \'93He\'92ll get you up in an hour and a quarter. Take this for your\
      _prot\'e9g\'e9es_,\'94 and he slipped a cheque for fifty pounds into her\
      hand. He saw her brightened eyes, and heard her murmur: \'93Oh!\
      Uncle Jolyon!\'94 and a real throb of pleasure went through him.\
      That meant one or two poor creatures helped a little, and it\
      meant that she would come again. He put his hand in at the window\
      and grasped hers once more. The carriage rolled away. He stood\
      looking at the moon and the shadows of the trees, and thought: \'93A\
      sweet night! She...!\'94\
\
\
\
\
      II\
\
\
      Two days of rain, and summer set in bland and sunny. Old Jolyon\
      walked and talked with Holly. At first he felt taller and full of\
      a new vigour; then he felt restless. Almost every afternoon they\
      would enter the coppice, and walk as far as the log. \'93Well, she\'92s\
      not there!\'94 he would think, \'93of course not!\'94 And he would feel a\
      little shorter, and drag his feet walking up the hill home, with\
      his hand clapped to his left side. Now and then the thought would\
      move in him: \'93Did she come\'97or did I dream it?\'94 and he would stare\
      at space, while the dog Balthasar stared at him. Of course she\
      would not come again! He opened the letters from Spain with less\
      excitement. They were not returning till July; he felt, oddly,\
      that he could bear it. Every day at dinner he screwed up his eyes\
      and looked at where she had sat. She was not there, so he\
      unscrewed his eyes again.\
\
      On the seventh afternoon he thought: \'93I must go up and get some\
      boots.\'94 He ordered Beacon, and set out. Passing from Putney\
      towards Hyde Park he reflected: \'93I might as well go to Chelsea\
      and see her.\'94 And he called out: \'93Just drive me to where you took\
      that lady the other night.\'94 The coachman turned his broad red\
      face, and his juicy lips answered: \'93The lady in grey, sir?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, the lady in grey.\'94 What other ladies were there! Stodgy\
      chap!\
\
      The carriage stopped before a small three-storied block of flats,\
      standing a little back from the river. With a practised eye old\
      Jolyon saw that they were cheap. \'93I should think about sixty\
      pound a year,\'94 he mused; and entering, he looked at the\
      name-board. The name \'93Forsyte\'94 was not on it, but against \'93First\
      Floor, Flat C\'94 were the words: \'93Mrs. Irene Heron.\'94 Ah! She had\
      taken her maiden name again! And somehow this pleased him. He\
      went upstairs slowly, feeling his side a little. He stood a\
      moment, before ringing, to lose the feeling of drag and\
      fluttering there. She would not be in! And then\'97Boots! The\
      thought was black. What did he want with boots at his age? He\
      could not wear out all those he had.\
\
      \'93Your mistress at home?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, sir.\'94\
\
      \'93Say Mr. Jolyon Forsyte.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, sir, will you come this way?\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon followed a very little maid\'97not more than sixteen one\
      would say\'97into a very small drawing-room where the sun-blinds\
      were drawn. It held a cottage piano and little else save a vague\
      fragrance and good taste. He stood in the middle, with his top\
      hat in his hand, and thought: \'93I expect she\'92s very badly off!\'94\
      There was a mirror above the fireplace, and he saw himself\
      reflected. An old-looking chap! He heard a rustle, and turned\
      round. She was so close that his moustache almost brushed her\
      forehead, just under her hair.\
\
      \'93I was driving up,\'94 he said. \'93Thought I\'92d look in on you, and ask\
      you how you got up the other night.\'94\
\
      And, seeing her smile, he felt suddenly relieved. She was really\
      glad to see him, perhaps.\
\
      \'93Would you like to put on your hat and come for a drive in the\
      Park?\'94\
\
      But while she was gone to put her hat on, he frowned. The Park!\
      James and Emily! Mrs. Nicholas, or some other member of his\
      precious family would be there very likely, prancing up and down.\
      And they would go and wag their tongues about having seen him\
      with her, afterwards. Better not! He did not wish to revive the\
      echoes of the past on Forsyte \'92Change. He removed a white hair\
      from the lapel of his closely-buttoned-up frock coat, and passed\
      his hand over his cheeks, moustache, and square chin. It felt\
      very hollow there under the cheekbones. He had not been eating\
      much lately\'97he had better get that little whippersnapper who\
      attended Holly to give him a tonic. But she had come back and\
      when they were in the carriage, he said:\
\
      \'93Suppose we go and sit in Kensington Gardens instead?\'94 and added\
      with a twinkle: \'93No prancing up and down there,\'94 as if she had\
      been in the secret of his thoughts.\
\
      Leaving the carriage, they entered those select precincts, and\
      strolled towards the water.\
\
      \'93You\'92ve gone back to your maiden name, I see,\'94 he said: \'93I\'92m not\
      sorry.\'94\
\
      She slipped her hand under his arm: \'93Has June forgiven me, Uncle\
      Jolyon?\'94\
\
      He answered gently: \'93Yes\'97yes; of course, why not?\'94\
\
      \'93And have you?\'94\
\
      \'93I? I forgave you as soon as I saw how the land really lay.\'94 And\
      perhaps he had; his instinct had always been to forgive the\
      beautiful.\
\
      She drew a deep breath. \'93I never regretted\'97I couldn\'92t. Did you\
      ever love very deeply, Uncle Jolyon?\'94\
\
      At that strange question old Jolyon stared before him. Had he? He\
      did not seem to remember that he ever had. But he did not like to\
      say this to the young woman whose hand was touching his arm,\
      whose life was suspended, as it were, by memory of a tragic love.\
      And he thought: \'93If I had met you when I was young I\'97I might have\
      made a fool of myself, perhaps.\'94 And a longing to escape in\
      generalities beset him.\
\
      \'93Love\'92s a queer thing,\'94 he said, \'93fatal thing often. It was the\
      Greeks\'97wasn\'92t it?\'97made love into a goddess; they were right, I\
      dare say, but then they lived in the Golden Age.\'94\
\
      \'93Phil adored them.\'94\
\
      Phil! The word jarred him, for suddenly\'97with his power to see all\
      round a thing, he perceived why she was putting up with him like\
      this. She wanted to talk about her lover! Well! If it was any\
      pleasure to her! And he said: \'93Ah! There was a bit of the\
      sculptor in him, I fancy.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes. He loved balance and symmetry; he loved the whole-hearted\
      way the Greeks gave themselves to art.\'94\
\
      Balance! The chap had no balance at all, if he remembered; as for\
      symmetry\'97clean-built enough he was, no doubt; but those queer\
      eyes of his, and high cheek-bones\'97Symmetry?\
\
      \'93You\'92re of the Golden Age, too, Uncle Jolyon.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon looked round at her. Was she chaffing him? No, her\
      eyes were soft as velvet. Was she flattering him? But if so, why?\
      There was nothing to be had out of an old chap like him.\
\
      \'93Phil thought so. He used to say: \'91But I can never tell him that\
      I admire him.\'92\'94\
\
      Ah! There it was again. Her dead lover; her desire to talk of\
      him! And he pressed her arm, half resentful of those memories,\
      half grateful, as if he recognised what a link they were between\
      herself and him.\
\
      \'93He was a very talented young fellow,\'94 he murmured. \'93It\'92s hot; I\
      feel the heat nowadays. Let\'92s sit down.\'94\
\
      They took two chairs beneath a chestnut tree whose broad leaves\
      covered them from the peaceful glory of the afternoon. A pleasure\
      to sit there and watch her, and feel that she liked to be with\
      him. And the wish to increase that liking, if he could, made him\
      go on:\
\
      \'93I expect he showed you a side of him I never saw. He\'92d be at his\
      best with you. His ideas of art were a little new\'97to me\'94\'97he had\
      stiffed the word \'91fangled.\'92\
\
      \'93Yes: but he used to say you had a real sense of beauty.\'94 Old\
      Jolyon thought: \'93The devil he did!\'94 but answered with a twinkle:\
      \'93Well, I have, or I shouldn\'92t be sitting here with you.\'94 She was\
      fascinating when she smiled with her eyes, like that!\
\
      \'93He thought you had one of those hearts that never grow old. Phil\
      had real insight.\'94\
\
      He was not taken in by this flattery spoken out of the past, out\
      of a longing to talk of her dead lover\'97not a bit; and yet it was\
      precious to hear, because she pleased his eyes and heart\
      which\'97quite true!\'97had never grown old. Was that because\'97unlike\
      her and her dead lover, he had never loved to desperation, had\
      always kept his balance, his sense of symmetry. Well! It had left\
      him power, at eighty-four, to admire beauty. And he thought, \'93If\
      I were a painter or a sculptor! But I\'92m an old chap. Make hay\
      while the sun shines.\'94\
\
      A couple with arms entwined crossed on the grass before them, at\
      the edge of the shadow from their tree. The sunlight fell cruelly\
      on their pale, squashed, unkempt young faces. \'93We\'92re an ugly\
      lot!\'94 said old Jolyon suddenly. \'93It amazes me to see how\'97love\
      triumphs over that.\'94\
\
      \'93Love triumphs over everything!\'94\
\
      \'93The young think so,\'94 he muttered.\
\
      \'93Love has no age, no limit, and no death.\'94\
\
      With that glow in her pale face, her breast heaving, her eyes so\
      large and dark and soft, she looked like Venus come to life! But\
      this extravagance brought instant reaction, and, twinkling, he\
      said: \'93Well, if it had limits, we shouldn\'92t be born; for by\
      George! it\'92s got a lot to put up with.\'94\
\
      Then, removing his top hat, he brushed it round with a cuff. The\
      great clumsy thing heated his forehead; in these days he often\
      got a rush of blood to the head\'97his circulation was not what it\
      had been.\
\
      She still sat gazing straight before her, and suddenly she\
      murmured:\
\
      \'93It\'92s strange enough that _I\'92m_ alive.\'94\
\
      Those words of Jo\'92s \'93Wild and lost\'94 came back to him.\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 he said: \'93my son saw you for a moment\'97that day.\'94\
\
      \'93Was it your son? I heard a voice in the hall; I thought for a\
      second it was\'97Phil.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon saw her lips tremble. She put her hand over them, took\
      it away again, and went on calmly: \'93That night I went to the\
      Embankment; a woman caught me by the dress. She told me about\
      herself. When one knows that others suffer, one\'92s ashamed.\'94\
\
      \'93One of _those?_\'94\
\
      She nodded, and horror stirred within old Jolyon, the horror of\
      one who has never known a struggle with desperation. Almost\
      against his will he muttered: \'93Tell me, won\'92t you?\'94\
\
      \'93I didn\'92t care whether I lived or died. When you\'92re like that,\
      Fate ceases to want to kill you. She took care of me three\
      days\'97she never left me. I had no money. That\'92s why I do what I\
      can for them, now.\'94\
\
      But old Jolyon was thinking: \'93No money!\'94 What fate could compare\
      with that? Every other was involved in it.\
\
      \'93I wish you had come to me,\'94 he said. \'93Why didn\'92t you?\'94 But Irene\
      did not answer.\
\
      \'93Because my name was Forsyte, I suppose? Or was it June who kept\
      you away? How are you getting on now?\'94 His eyes involuntarily\
      swept her body. Perhaps even now she was\'97! And yet she wasn\'92t\
      thin\'97not really!\
\
      \'93Oh! with my fifty pounds a year, I make just enough.\'94 The answer\
      did not reassure him; he had lost confidence. And that fellow\
      Soames! But his sense of justice stifled condemnation. No, she\
      would certainly have died rather than take another penny from\
      _him_. Soft as she looked, there must be strength in her\
      somewhere\'97strength and fidelity. But what business had young\
      Bosinney to have got run over and left her stranded like this!\
\
      \'93Well, you must come to me now,\'94 he said, \'93for anything you want,\
      or I shall be quite cut up.\'94 And putting on his hat, he rose.\
      \'93Let\'92s go and get some tea. I told that lazy chap to put the\
      horses up for an hour, and come for me at your place. We\'92ll take\
      a cab presently; I can\'92t walk as I used to.\'94\
\
      He enjoyed that stroll to the Kensington end of the gardens\'97the\
      sound of her voice, the glancing of her eyes, the subtle beauty\
      of a charming form moving beside him. He enjoyed their tea at\
      Ruffel\'92s in the High Street, and came out thence with a great box\
      of chocolates swung on his little finger. He enjoyed the drive\
      back to Chelsea in a hansom, smoking his cigar. She had promised\
      to come down next Sunday and play to him again, and already in\
      thought he was plucking carnations and early roses for her to\
      carry back to town. It was a pleasure to give her a little\
      pleasure, if it _were_ pleasure from an old chap like him! The\
      carriage was already there when they arrived. Just like that\
      fellow, who was always late when he was wanted! Old Jolyon went\
      in for a minute to say good-bye. The little dark hall of the flat\
      was impregnated with a disagreeable odour of patchouli, and on a\
      bench against the wall\'97its only furniture\'97he saw a figure\
      sitting. He heard Irene say softly: \'93Just one minute.\'94 In the\
      little drawing-room when the door was shut, he asked gravely:\
      \'93One of your _prot\'e9g\'e9es?_\'94\
\
      \'93Yes. Now thanks to you, I can do something for her.\'94\
\
      He stood, staring, and stroking that chin whose strength had\
      frightened so many in its time. The idea of her thus actually in\
      contact with this outcast grieved and frightened him. What could\
      she do for them? Nothing. Only soil and make trouble for herself,\
      perhaps. And he said: \'93Take care, my dear! The world puts the\
      worst construction on everything.\'94\
\
      \'93I know that.\'94\
\
      He was abashed by her quiet smile. \'93Well then\'97Sunday,\'94 he\
      murmured: \'93Good-bye.\'94\
\
      She put her cheek forward for him to kiss.\
\
      \'93Good-bye,\'94 he said again; \'93take care of yourself.\'94 And he went\
      out, not looking towards the figure on the bench. He drove home\
      by way of Hammersmith; that he might stop at a place he knew of\
      and tell them to send her in two dozen of their best Burgundy.\
      She must want picking-up sometimes! Only in Richmond Park did he\
      remember that he had gone up to order himself some boots, and was\
      surprised that he could have had so paltry an idea.\
\
\
\
\
      III\
\
\
      The little spirits of the past which throng an old man\'92s days had\
      never pushed their faces up to his so seldom as in the seventy\
      hours elapsing before Sunday came. The spirit of the future, with\
      the charm of the unknown, put up her lips instead. Old Jolyon was\
      not restless now, and paid no visits to the log, because she was\
      _coming to lunch_. There is wonderful finality about a meal; it\
      removes a world of doubts, for no one misses meals except for\
      reasons beyond control. He played many games with Holly on the\
      lawn, pitching them up to her who was batting so as to be ready\
      to bowl to Jolly in the holidays. For she was not a Forsyte, but\
      Jolly was\'97and Forsytes always bat, until they have resigned and\
      reached the age of eighty-five. The dog Balthasar, in attendance,\
      lay on the ball as often as he could, and the page-boy fielded,\
      till his face was like the harvest moon. And because the time was\
      getting shorter, each day was longer and more golden than the\
      last. On Friday night he took a liver pill, his side hurt him\
      rather, and though it was not the liver side, there is no remedy\
      like that. Anyone telling him that he had found a new excitement\
      in life and that excitement was not good for him, would have been\
      met by one of those steady and rather defiant looks of his\
      deep-set iron-grey eyes, which seemed to say: \'93I know my own\
      business best.\'94 He always had and always would.\
\
      On Sunday morning, when Holly had gone with her governess to\
      church, he visited the strawberry beds. There, accompanied by the\
      dog Balthasar, he examined the plants narrowly and succeeded in\
      finding at least two dozen berries which were really ripe.\
      Stooping was not good for him, and he became very dizzy and red\
      in the forehead. Having placed the strawberries in a dish on the\
      dining-table, he washed his hands and bathed his forehead with\
      eau de Cologne. There, before the mirror, it occurred to him that\
      he was thinner. What a \'93threadpaper\'94 he had been when he was\
      young! It was nice to be slim\'97he could not bear a fat chap; and\
      yet perhaps his cheeks were _too_ thin! She was to arrive by\
      train at half-past twelve and walk up, entering from the road\
      past Drage\'92s farm at the far end of the coppice. And, having\
      looked into June\'92s room to see that there was hot water ready, he\
      set forth to meet her, leisurely, for his heart was beating. The\
      air smelled sweet, larks sang, and the Grand Stand at Epsom was\
      visible. A perfect day! On just such a one, no doubt, six years\
      ago, Soames had brought young Bosinney down with him to look at\
      the site before they began to build. It was Bosinney who had\
      pitched on the exact spot for the house\'97as June had often told\
      him. In these days he was thinking much about that young fellow,\
      as if his spirit were really haunting the field of his last work,\
      on the chance of seeing\'97her. Bosinney\'97the one man who had\
      possessed her heart, to whom she had given her whole self with\
      rapture! At his age one could not, of course, imagine such\
      things, but there stirred in him a queer vague aching\'97as it were\
      the ghost of an impersonal jealousy; and a feeling, too, more\
      generous, of pity for that love so early lost. All over in a few\
      poor months! Well, well! He looked at his watch before entering\
      the coppice\'97only a quarter past, twenty-five minutes to wait! And\
      then, turning the corner of the path, he saw her exactly where he\
      had seen her the first time, on the log; and realised that she\
      must have come by the earlier train to sit there alone for a\
      couple of hours at least. Two hours of her society missed! What\
      memory could make that log so dear to her? His face showed what\
      he was thinking, for she said at once:\
\
      \'93Forgive me, Uncle Jolyon; it was here that I first knew.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, yes; there it is for you whenever you like. You\'92re looking\
      a little Londony; you\'92re giving too many lessons.\'94\
\
      That she should have to give lessons worried him. Lessons to a\
      parcel of young girls thumping out scales with their thick\
      fingers.\
\
      \'93Where do you go to give them?\'94 he asked.\
\
      \'93They\'92re mostly Jewish families, luckily.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon stared; to all Forsytes Jews seem strange and\
      doubtful.\
\
      \'93They love music, and they\'92re very kind.\'94\
\
      \'93They had better be, by George!\'94 He took her arm\'97his side always\
      hurt him a little going uphill\'97and said:\
\
      \'93Did you ever see anything like those buttercups? They came like\
      that in a night.\'94\
\
      Her eyes seemed really to fly over the field, like bees after the\
      flowers and the honey. \'93I wanted you to see them\'97wouldn\'92t let\
      them turn the cows in yet.\'94 Then, remembering that she had come\
      to talk about Bosinney, he pointed to the clock-tower over the\
      stables:\
\
      \'93I expect _he_ wouldn\'92t have let me put that there\'97had no notion\
      of time, if I remember.\'94\
\
      But, pressing his arm to her, she talked of flowers instead, and\
      he knew it was done that he might not feel she came because of\
      her dead lover.\
\
      \'93The best flower I can show you,\'94 he said, with a sort of\
      triumph, \'93is my little sweet. She\'92ll be back from Church\
      directly. There\'92s something about her which reminds me a little\
      of you,\'94 and it did not seem to him peculiar that he had put it\
      thus, instead of saying: \'93There\'92s something about you which\
      reminds me a little of her.\'94 Ah! And here she was!\
\
      Holly, followed closely by her elderly French governess, whose\
      digestion had been ruined twenty-two years ago in the siege of\
      Strasbourg, came rushing towards them from under the oak tree.\
      She stopped about a dozen yards away, to pat Balthasar and\
      pretend that this was all she had in her mind. Old Jolyon, who\
      knew better, said:\
\
      \'93Well, my darling, here\'92s the lady in grey I promised you.\'94\
\
      Holly raised herself and looked up. He watched the two of them\
      with a twinkle, Irene smiling, Holly beginning with grave\
      inquiry, passing into a shy smile too, and then to something\
      deeper. She had a sense of beauty, that child\'97knew what was what!\
      He enjoyed the sight of the kiss between them.\
\
      \'93Mrs. Heron, Mam\'92zelle Beauce. Well, Mam\'92zelle\'97good sermon?\'94\
\
      For, now that he had not much more time before him, the only part\
      of the service connected with this world absorbed what interest\
      in church remained to him. Mam\'92zelle Beauce stretched out a\
      spidery hand clad in a black kid glove\'97she had been in the best\
      families\'97and the rather sad eyes of her lean yellowish face\
      seemed to ask: \'93Are you well-brrred?\'94 Whenever Holly or Jolly did\
      anything unpleasing to her\'97a not uncommon occurrence\'97she would\
      say to them: \'93The little Tayleurs never did that\'97they were such\
      well-brrred little children.\'94 Jolly hated the little Tayleurs;\
      Holly wondered dreadfully how it was she fell so short of them.\
      \'93A thin rum little soul,\'94 old Jolyon thought her\'97Mam\'92zelle\
      Beauce.\
\
      Luncheon was a successful meal, the mushrooms which he himself\
      had picked in the mushroom house, his chosen strawberries, and\
      another bottle of the Steinberg cabinet filled him with a certain\
      aromatic spirituality, and a conviction that he would have a\
      touch of eczema to-morrow.\
\
      After lunch they sat under the oak tree drinking Turkish coffee.\
      It was no matter of grief to him when Mademoiselle Beauce\
      withdrew to write her Sunday letter to her sister, whose future\
      had been endangered in the past by swallowing a pin\'97an event held\
      up daily in warning to the children to eat slowly and digest what\
      they had eaten. At the foot of the bank, on a carriage rug, Holly\
      and the dog Balthasar teased and loved each other, and in the\
      shade old Jolyon with his legs crossed and his cigar luxuriously\
      savoured, gazed at Irene sitting in the swing. A light, vaguely\
      swaying, grey figure with a fleck of sunlight here and there upon\
      it, lips just opened, eyes dark and soft under lids a little\
      drooped. She looked content; surely it did her good to come and\
      see him! The selfishness of age had not set its proper grip on\
      him, for he could still feel pleasure in the pleasure of others,\
      realising that what he wanted, though much, was not quite all\
      that mattered.\
\
      \'93It\'92s quiet here,\'94 he said; \'93you mustn\'92t come down if you find it\
      dull. But it\'92s a pleasure to see you. My little sweet is the only\
      face which gives me any pleasure, except yours.\'94\
\
      From her smile he knew that she was not beyond liking to be\
      appreciated, and this reassured him. \'93That\'92s not humbug,\'94 he\
      said. \'93I never told a woman I admired her when I didn\'92t. In fact\
      I don\'92t know when I\'92ve told a woman I admired her, except my wife\
      in the old days; and wives are funny.\'94 He was silent, but resumed\
      abruptly:\
\
      \'93She used to expect me to say it more often than I felt it, and\
      there we were.\'94 Her face looked mysteriously troubled, and,\
      afraid that he had said something painful, he hurried on: \'93When\
      my little sweet marries, I hope she\'92ll find someone who knows\
      what women feel. I shan\'92t be here to see it, but there\'92s too much\
      topsy-turvydom in marriage; I don\'92t want her to pitch up against\
      that.\'94 And, aware that he had made bad worse, he added: \'93That dog\
      _will_ scratch.\'94\
\
      A silence followed. Of what was she thinking, this pretty\
      creature whose life was spoiled; who had done with love, and yet\
      was made for love? Some day when he was gone, perhaps, she would\
      find another mate\'97not so disorderly as that young fellow who had\
      got himself run over. Ah! but her husband?\
\
      \'93Does Soames never trouble you?\'94 he asked.\
\
      She shook her head. Her face had closed up suddenly. For all her\
      softness there was something irreconcilable about her. And a\
      glimpse of light on the inexorable nature of sex antipathies\
      strayed into a brain which, belonging to early Victorian\
      civilisation\'97so much older than this of his old age\'97had never\
      thought about such primitive things.\
\
      \'93That\'92s a comfort,\'94 he said. \'93You can see the Grand Stand to-day.\
      Shall we take a turn round?\'94\
\
      Through the flower and fruit garden, against whose high outer\
      walls peach trees and nectarines were trained to the sun, through\
      the stables, the vinery, the mushroom house, the asparagus beds,\
      the rosery, the summer-house, he conducted her\'97even into the\
      kitchen garden to see the tiny green peas which Holly loved to\
      scoop out of their pods with her finger, and lick up from the\
      palm of her little brown hand. Many delightful things he showed\
      her, while Holly and the dog Balthasar danced ahead, or came to\
      them at intervals for attention. It was one of the happiest\
      afternoons he had ever spent, but it tired him and he was glad to\
      sit down in the music room and let her give him tea. A special\
      little friend of Holly\'92s had come in\'97a fair child with short hair\
      like a boy\'92s. And the two sported in the distance, under the\
      stairs, on the stairs, and up in the gallery. Old Jolyon begged\
      for Chopin. She played studies, mazurkas, waltzes, till the two\
      children, creeping near, stood at the foot of the piano their\
      dark and golden heads bent forward, listening. Old Jolyon\
      watched.\
\
      \'93Let\'92s see you dance, you two!\'94\
\
      Shyly, with a false start, they began. Bobbing and circling,\
      earnest, not very adroit, they went past and past his chair to\
      the strains of that waltz. He watched them and the face of her\
      who was playing turned smiling towards those little dancers\
      thinking:\
\
      \'93Sweetest picture I\'92ve seen for ages.\'94\
\
      A voice said:\
\
      \'93Hollee! _Mais enfin\'97qu\'92est-ce que tu fais la\'97danser, le\
      dimanche! Viens, donc!_\'94\
\
      But the children came close to old Jolyon, knowing that he would\
      save them, and gazed into a face which was decidedly \'93caught\
      out.\'94\
\
      \'93Better the day, better the deed, Mam\'92zelle. It\'92s all my doing.\
      Trot along, chicks, and have your tea.\'94\
\
      And, when they were gone, followed by the dog Balthasar, who took\
      every meal, he looked at Irene with a twinkle and said:\
\
      \'93Well, there we are! Aren\'92t they sweet? Have you any little ones\
      among your pupils?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, three\'97two of them darlings.\'94\
\
      \'93Pretty?\'94\
\
      \'93Lovely!\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon sighed; he had an insatiable appetite for the very\
      young. \'93My little sweet,\'94 he said, \'93is devoted to music; she\'92ll\
      be a musician some day. You wouldn\'92t give me your opinion of her\
      playing, I suppose?\'94\
\
      \'93Of course I will.\'94\
\
      \'93You wouldn\'92t like\'97\'94 but he stifled the words \'93to give her\
      lessons.\'94 The idea that she gave lessons was unpleasant to him;\
      yet it would mean that he would see her regularly. She left the\
      piano and came over to his chair.\
\
      \'93I would like, very much; but there is\'97June. When are they coming\
      back?\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon frowned. \'93Not till the middle of next month. What does\
      that matter?\'94\
\
      \'93You said June had forgiven me; but she could never forget, Uncle\
      Jolyon.\'94\
\
      Forget! She _must_ forget, if he wanted her to.\
\
      But as if answering, Irene shook her head. \'93You know she\
      couldn\'92t; one doesn\'92t forget.\'94\
\
      Always that wretched past! And he said with a sort of vexed\
      finality:\
\
      \'93Well, we shall see.\'94\
\
      He talked to her an hour or more, of the children, and a hundred\
      little things, till the carriage came round to take her home. And\
      when she had gone he went back to his chair, and sat there\
      smoothing his face and chin, dreaming over the day.\
\
      That evening after dinner he went to his study and took a sheet\
      of paper. He stayed for some minutes without writing, then rose\
      and stood under the masterpiece \'93Dutch Fishing Boats at Sunset.\'94\
      He was not thinking of that picture, but of his life. He was\
      going to leave her something in his Will; nothing could so have\
      stirred the stilly deeps of thought and memory. He was going to\
      leave her a portion of his wealth, of his aspirations, deeds,\
      qualities, work\'97all that had made that wealth; going to leave\
      her, too, a part of all he had missed in life, by his sane and\
      steady pursuit of wealth. All! What had he missed? \'93Dutch Fishing\
      Boats\'94 responded blankly; he crossed to the French window, and\
      drawing the curtain aside, opened it. A wind had got up, and one\
      of last year\'92s oak leaves which had somehow survived the\
      gardener\'92s brooms, was dragging itself with a tiny clicking\
      rustle along the stone terrace in the twilight. Except for that\
      it was very quiet out there, and he could smell the heliotrope\
      watered not long since. A bat went by. A bird uttered its last\
      \'93cheep.\'94 And right above the oak tree the first star shone. Faust\
      in the opera had bartered his soul for some fresh years of youth.\
      Morbid notion! No such bargain was possible, that was _real_\
      tragedy! No making oneself new again for love or life or\
      anything. Nothing left to do but enjoy beauty from afar off while\
      you could, and leave it something in your Will. But how much?\
      And, as if he could not make that calculation looking out into\
      the mild freedom of the country night, he turned back and went up\
      to the chimney-piece. There were his pet bronzes\'97a Cleopatra with\
      the asp at her breast; a Socrates; a greyhound playing with her\
      puppy; a strong man reining in some horses. \'93They last!\'94 he\
      thought, and a pang went through his heart. They had a thousand\
      years of life before them!\
\
      \'93How much?\'94 Well! enough at all events to save her getting old\
      before her time, to keep the lines out of her face as long as\
      possible, and grey from soiling that bright hair. He might live\
      another five years. She would be well over thirty by then. \'93How\
      much?\'94 She had none of his blood in her! In loyalty to the tenor\
      of his life for forty years and more, ever since he married and\
      founded that mysterious thing, a family, came this warning\
      thought\'97None of his blood, no right to anything! It was a luxury\
      then, this notion. An extravagance, a petting of an old man\'92s\
      whim, one of those things done in dotage. His real future was\
      vested in those who had his blood, in whom he would live on when\
      he was gone. He turned away from the bronzes and stood looking at\
      the old leather chair in which he had sat and smoked so many\
      hundreds of cigars. And suddenly he seemed to see her sitting\
      there in her grey dress, fragrant, soft, dark-eyed, graceful,\
      looking up at him. Why! She cared nothing for him, really; all\
      she cared for was that lost lover of hers. But she was there,\
      whether she would or no, giving him pleasure with her beauty and\
      grace. One had no right to inflict an old man\'92s company, no right\
      to ask her down to play to him and let him look at her\'97for no\
      reward! Pleasure must be paid for in this world. \'93How much?\'94\
      After all, there was plenty; his son and his three grandchildren\
      would never miss that little lump. He had made it himself, nearly\
      every penny; he could leave it where he liked, allow himself this\
      little pleasure. He went back to the bureau. \'93Well, I\'92m going\
      to,\'94 he thought, \'93let them think what they like. I\'92m going to!\'94\
      And he sat down.\
\
      \'93How much?\'94 Ten thousand, twenty thousand\'97how much? If only with\
      his money he could buy one year, one month of youth. And startled\
      by that thought, he wrote quickly:\
\
      \'93DEAR HERRING,\'97Draw me a codicil to this effect: \'93I leave to my\
      niece Irene Forsyte, born Irene Heron, by which name she now\
      goes, fifteen thousand pounds free of legacy duty.\'94\
\
      \'93Yours faithfully,\
      \'93JOLYON FORSYTE.\'94\
\
      When he had sealed and stamped the envelope, he went back to the\
      window and drew in a long breath. It was dark, but many stars\
      shone now.\
\
\
\
\
      IV\
\
\
      He woke at half-past two, an hour which long experience had\
      taught him brings panic intensity to all awkward thoughts.\
      Experience had also taught him that a further waking at the\
      proper hour of eight showed the folly of such panic. On this\
      particular morning the thought which gathered rapid momentum was\
      that if he became ill, at his age not improbable, he would not\
      see her. From this it was but a step to realisation that he would\
      be cut off, too, when his son and June returned from Spain. How\
      could he justify desire for the company of one who had\
      stolen\'97early morning does not mince words\'97June\'92s lover? That\
      lover was dead; but June was a stubborn little thing;\
      warm-hearted, but stubborn as wood, and\'97quite true\'97not one who\
      forgot! By the middle of next month they would be back. He had\
      barely five weeks left to enjoy the new interest which had come\
      into what remained of his life. Darkness showed up to him\
      absurdly clear the nature of his feeling. Admiration for beauty\'97a\
      craving to see that which delighted his eyes.\
\
      Preposterous, at his age! And yet\'97what other reason was there for\
      asking June to undergo such painful reminder, and how prevent his\
      son and his son\'92s wife from thinking him very queer? He would be\
      reduced to sneaking up to London, which tired him; and the least\
      indisposition would cut him off even from that. He lay with eyes\
      open, setting his jaw against the prospect, and calling himself\
      an old fool, while his heart beat loudly, and then seemed to stop\
      beating altogether. He had seen the dawn lighting the window\
      chinks, heard the birds chirp and twitter, and the cocks crow,\
      before he fell asleep again, and awoke tired but sane. Five weeks\
      before he need bother, at his age an eternity! But that early\
      morning panic had left its mark, had slightly fevered the will of\
      one who had always had his own way. He would see her as often as\
      he wished! Why not go up to town and make that codicil at his\
      solicitor\'92s instead of writing about it; she might like to go to\
      the opera! But, by train, for he would not have that fat chap\
      Beacon grinning behind his back. Servants were such fools; and,\
      as likely as not, they had known all the past history of Irene\
      and young Bosinney\'97servants knew everything, and suspected the\
      rest. He wrote to her that morning:\
\
      \'93MY DEAR IRENE,\'97I have to be up in town to-morrow. If you would\
      like to have a look in at the opera, come and dine with me\
      quietly ....\'94\
          But where? It was decades since he had dined anywhere in\
          London save at his Club or at a private house. Ah! that\
          new-fangled place close to Covent Garden....\
          \'93Let me have a line to-morrow morning to the Piedmont Hotel\
          whether to expect you there at 7 o\'92clock.\
\
      \'93Yours affectionately,\
      \'93JOLYON FORSYTE.\'94\
\
      She would understand that he just wanted to give her a little\
      pleasure; for the idea that she should guess he had this itch to\
      see her was instinctively unpleasant to him; it was not seemly\
      that one so old should go out of his way to see beauty,\
      especially in a woman.\
\
      The journey next day, short though it was, and the visit to his\
      lawyer\'92s, tired him. It was hot too, and after dressing for\
      dinner he lay down on the sofa in his bedroom to rest a little.\
      He must have had a sort of fainting fit, for he came to himself\
      feeling very queer; and with some difficulty rose and rang the\
      bell. Why! it was past seven! And there he was and she would be\
      waiting. But suddenly the dizziness came on again, and he was\
      obliged to relapse on the sofa. He heard the maid\'92s voice say:\
\
      \'93Did you ring, sir?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, come here\'94; he could not see her clearly, for the cloud in\
      front of his eyes. \'93I\'92m not well, I want some sal volatile.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, sir.\'94 Her voice sounded frightened.\
\
      Old Jolyon made an effort.\
\
      \'93Don\'92t go. Take this message to my niece\'97a lady waiting in the\
      hall\'97a lady in grey. Say Mr. Forsyte is not well\'97the heat. He is\
      very sorry; if he is not down directly, she is not to wait\
      dinner.\'94\
\
      When she was gone, he thought feebly: \'93Why did I say a lady in\
      grey\'97she may be in anything. Sal volatile!\'94 He did not go off\
      again, yet was not conscious of how Irene came to be standing\
      beside him, holding smelling salts to his nose, and pushing a\
      pillow up behind his head. He heard her say anxiously: \'93Dear\
      Uncle Jolyon, what is it?\'94 was dimly conscious of the soft\
      pressure of her lips on his hand; then drew a long breath of\
      smelling salts, suddenly discovered strength in them, and\
      sneezed.\
\
      \'93Ha!\'94 he said, \'93it\'92s nothing. How did you get here? Go down and\
      dine\'97the tickets are on the dressing-table. I shall be all right\
      in a minute.\'94\
\
      He felt her cool hand on his forehead, smelled violets, and sat\
      divided between a sort of pleasure and a determination to be all\
      right.\
\
      \'93Why! You _are_ in grey!\'94 he said. \'93Help me up.\'94 Once on his feet\
      he gave himself a shake.\
\
      \'93What business had I to go off like that!\'94 And he moved very\
      slowly to the glass. What a cadaverous chap! Her voice, behind\
      him, murmured:\
\
      \'93You mustn\'92t come down, Uncle; you must rest.\'94\
\
      \'93Fiddlesticks! A glass of champagne\'92ll soon set me to rights. I\
      can\'92t have you missing the opera.\'94\
\
      But the journey down the corridor was troublesome. What carpets\
      they had in these newfangled places, so thick that you tripped up\
      in them at every step! In the lift he noticed how concerned she\
      looked, and said with the ghost of a twinkle:\
\
      \'93I\'92m a pretty host.\'94\
\
      When the lift stopped he had to hold firmly to the seat to\
      prevent its slipping under him; but after soup and a glass of\
      champagne he felt much better, and began to enjoy an infirmity\
      which had brought such solicitude into her manner towards him.\
\
      \'93I should have liked you for a daughter,\'94 he said suddenly; and\
      watching the smile in her eyes, went on:\
\
      \'93You mustn\'92t get wrapped up in the past at your time of life;\
      plenty of that when you get to my age. That\'92s a nice dress\'97I like\
      the style.\'94\
\
      \'93I made it myself.\'94\
\
      Ah! A woman who could make herself a pretty frock had not lost\
      her interest in life.\
\
      \'93Make hay while the sun shines,\'94 he said; \'93and drink that up. I\
      want to see some colour in your cheeks. We mustn\'92t waste life; it\
      doesn\'92t do. There\'92s a new Marguerite to-night; let\'92s hope she\
      won\'92t be fat. And Mephisto\'97anything more dreadful than a fat chap\
      playing the Devil I can\'92t imagine.\'94\
\
      But they did not go to the opera after all, for in getting up\
      from dinner the dizziness came over him again, and she insisted\
      on his staying quiet and going to bed early. When he parted from\
      her at the door of the hotel, having paid the cabman to drive her\
      to Chelsea, he sat down again for a moment to enjoy the memory of\
      her words: \'93You _are_ such a darling to me, Uncle Jolyon!\'94 Why!\
      Who wouldn\'92t be! He would have liked to stay up another day and\
      take her to the Zoo, but two days running of him would bore her\
      to death. No, he must wait till next Sunday; she had promised to\
      come then. They would settle those lessons for Holly, if only for\
      a month. It would be something. That little Mam\'92zelle Beauce\
      wouldn\'92t like it, but she would have to lump it. And crushing his\
      old opera hat against his chest he sought the lift.\
\
      He drove to Waterloo next morning, struggling with a desire to\
      say: \'93Drive me to Chelsea.\'94 But his sense of proportion was too\
      strong. Besides, he still felt shaky, and did not want to risk\
      another aberration like that of last night, away from home.\
      Holly, too, was expecting him, and what he had in his bag for\
      her. Not that there was any cupboard love in his little sweet\'97she\
      was a bundle of affection. Then, with the rather bitter cynicism\
      of the old, he wondered for a second whether it was not cupboard\
      love which made Irene put up with him. No, she was not that sort\
      either. She had, if anything, too little notion of how to butter\
      her bread, no sense of property, poor thing! Besides, he had not\
      breathed a word about that codicil, nor should he\'97sufficient unto\
      the day was the good thereof.\
\
      In the victoria which met him at the station Holly was\
      restraining the dog Balthasar, and their caresses made \'93jubey\'94\
      his drive home. All the rest of that fine hot day and most of the\
      next he was content and peaceful, reposing in the shade, while\
      the long lingering sunshine showered gold on the lawns and the\
      flowers. But on Thursday evening at his lonely dinner he began to\
      count the hours; sixty-five till he would go down to meet her\
      again in the little coppice, and walk up through the fields at\
      her side. He had intended to consult the doctor about his\
      fainting fit, but the fellow would be sure to insist on quiet, no\
      excitement and all that; and he did not mean to be tied by the\
      leg, did not want to be told of an infirmity\'97if there were one,\
      could not afford to hear of it at his time of life, now that this\
      new interest had come. And he carefully avoided making any\
      mention of it in a letter to his son. It would only bring them\
      back with a run! How far this silence was due to consideration\
      for their pleasure, how far to regard for his own, he did not\
      pause to consider.\
\
      That night in his study he had just finished his cigar and was\
      dozing off, when he heard the rustle of a gown, and was conscious\
      of a scent of violets. Opening his eyes he saw her, dressed in\
      grey, standing by the fireplace, holding out her arms. The odd\
      thing was that, though those arms seemed to hold nothing, they\
      were curved as if round someone\'92s neck, and her own neck was bent\
      back, her lips open, her eyes closed. She vanished at once, and\
      there were the mantelpiece and his bronzes. But those bronzes and\
      the mantelpiece had not been there when she was, only the\
      fireplace and the wall! Shaken and troubled, he got up. \'93I must\
      take medicine,\'94 he thought; \'93I can\'92t be well.\'94 His heart beat too\
      fast, he had an asthmatic feeling in the chest; and going to the\
      window, he opened it to get some air. A dog was barking far away,\
      one of the dogs at Gage\'92s farm no doubt, beyond the coppice. A\
      beautiful still night, but dark. \'93I dropped off,\'94 he mused,\
      \'93that\'92s it! And yet I\'92ll swear my eyes were open!\'94 A sound like a\
      sigh seemed to answer.\
\
      \'93What\'92s that?\'94 he said sharply, \'93who\'92s there?\'94\
\
      Putting his hand to his side to still the beating of his heart,\
      he stepped out on the terrace. Something soft scurried by in the\
      dark. \'93Shoo!\'94 It was that great grey cat. \'93Young Bosinney was\
      like a great cat!\'94 he thought. \'93It was him in there, that\
      she\'97that she was\'97He\'92s got her still!\'94 He walked to the edge of\
      the terrace, and looked down into the darkness; he could just see\
      the powdering of the daisies on the unmown lawn. Here to-day and\
      gone to-morrow! And there came the moon, who saw all, young and\
      old, alive and dead, and didn\'92t care a dump! His own turn soon.\
      For a single day of youth he would give what was left! And he\
      turned again towards the house. He could see the windows of the\
      night nursery up there. His little sweet would be asleep. \'93Hope\
      that dog won\'92t wake her!\'94 he thought. \'93What is it makes us love,\
      and makes us die! I must go to bed.\'94\
\
      And across the terrace stones, growing grey in the moonlight, he\
      passed back within.\
\
\
\
\
      V\
\
\
      How should an old man live his days if not in dreaming of his\
      well-spent past? In that, at all events, there is no agitating\
      warmth, only pale winter sunshine. The shell can withstand the\
      gentle beating of the dynamos of memory. The present he should\
      distrust; the future shun. From beneath thick shade he should\
      watch the sunlight creeping at his toes. If there be sun of\
      summer, let him not go out into it, mistaking it for the\
      Indian-summer sun! Thus peradventure he shall decline softly,\
      slowly, imperceptibly, until impatient Nature clutches his\
      wind-pipe and he gasps away to death some early morning before\
      the world is aired, and they put on his tombstone: \'93In the\
      fulness of years!\'94 Yea! If he preserve his principles in perfect\
      order, a Forsyte may live on long after he is dead.\
\
      Old Jolyon was conscious of all this, and yet there was in him\
      that which transcended Forsyteism. For it is written that a\
      Forsyte shall not love beauty more than reason; nor his own way\
      more than his own health. And something beat within him in these\
      days that with each throb fretted at the thinning shell. His\
      sagacity knew this, but it knew too that he could not stop that\
      beating, nor would if he could. And yet, if you had told him he\
      was living on his capital, he would have stared you down. No, no;\
      a man did not live on his capital; it was not done! The\
      shibboleths of the past are ever more real than the actualities\
      of the present. And he, to whom living on one\'92s capital had\
      always been anathema, could not have borne to have applied so\
      gross a phrase to his own case. Pleasure is healthful; beauty\
      good to see; to live again in the youth of the young\'97and what\
      else on earth was he doing!\
\
      Methodically, as had been the way of his whole life, he now\
      arranged his time. On Tuesdays he journeyed up to town by train;\
      Irene came and dined with him. And they went to the opera. On\
      Thursdays he drove to town, and, putting that fat chap and his\
      horses up, met her in Kensington Gardens, picking up the carriage\
      after he had left her, and driving home again in time for dinner.\
      He threw out the casual formula that he had business in London on\
      those two days. On Wednesdays and Saturdays she came down to give\
      Holly music lessons. The greater the pleasure he took in her\
      society, the more scrupulously fastidious he became, just a\
      matter-of-fact and friendly uncle. Not even in feeling, really,\
      was he more\'97for, after all, there was his age. And yet, if she\
      were late he fidgeted himself to death. If she missed coming,\
      which happened twice, his eyes grew sad as an old dog\'92s, and he\
      failed to sleep.\
\
      And so a month went by\'97a month of summer in the fields, and in\
      his heart, with summer\'92s heat and the fatigue thereof. Who could\
      have believed a few weeks back that he would have looked forward\
      to his son\'92s and his grand-daughter\'92s return with something like\
      dread! There was such a delicious freedom, such recovery of that\
      independence a man enjoys before he founds a family, about these\
      weeks of lovely weather, and this new companionship with one who\
      demanded nothing, and remained always a little unknown, retaining\
      the fascination of mystery. It was like a draught of wine to him\
      who has been drinking water for so long that he has almost\
      forgotten the stir wine brings to his blood, the narcotic to his\
      brain. The flowers were coloured brighter, scents and music and\
      the sunlight had a living value\'97were no longer mere reminders of\
      past enjoyment. There was something now to live for which stirred\
      him continually to anticipation. He lived in that, not in\
      retrospection; the difference is considerable to any so old as\
      he. The pleasures of the table, never of much consequence to one\
      naturally abstemious, had lost all value. He ate little, without\
      knowing what he ate; and every day grew thinner and more worn to\
      look at. He was again a \'93threadpaper\'94. and to this thinned form\
      his massive forehead, with hollows at the temples, gave more\
      dignity than ever. He was very well aware that he ought to see\
      the doctor, but liberty was too sweet. He could not afford to pet\
      his frequent shortness of breath and the pain in his side at the\
      expense of liberty. Return to the vegetable existence he had led\
      among the agricultural journals with the life-size mangold\
      wurzels, before this new attraction came into his life\'97no! He\
      exceeded his allowance of cigars. Two a day had always been his\
      rule. Now he smoked three and sometimes four\'97a man will when he\
      is filled with the creative spirit. But very often he thought: \'93I\
      must give up smoking, and coffee; I must give up rattling up to\
      town.\'94 But he did not; there was no one in any sort of authority\
      to notice him, and this was a priceless boon. The servants\
      perhaps wondered, but they were, naturally, dumb. Mam\'92zelle\
      Beauce was too concerned with her own digestion, and too\
      \'93well-brrred\'94 to make personal allusions. Holly had not as yet an\
      eye for the relative appearance of him who was her plaything and\
      her god. It was left for Irene herself to beg him to eat more, to\
      rest in the hot part of the day, to take a tonic, and so forth.\
      But she did not tell him that she was the cause of his\
      thinness\'97for one cannot see the havoc oneself is working. A man\
      of eighty-five has no passions, but the Beauty which produces\
      passion works on in the old way, till death closes the eyes which\
      crave the sight of Her.\
\
      On the first day of the second week in July he received a letter\
      from his son in Paris to say that they would all be back on\
      Friday. This had always been more sure than Fate; but, with the\
      pathetic improvidence given to the old, that they may endure to\
      the end, he had never quite admitted it. Now he did, and\
      something would have to be done. He had ceased to be able to\
      imagine life without this new interest, but that which is not\
      imagined sometimes exists, as Forsytes are perpetually finding to\
      their cost. He sat in his old leather chair, doubling up the\
      letter, and mumbling with his lips the end of an unlighted cigar.\
      After to-morrow his Tuesday expeditions to town would have to be\
      abandoned. He could still drive up, perhaps, once a week, on the\
      pretext of seeing his man of business. But even that would be\
      dependent on his health, for now they would begin to fuss about\
      him. The lessons! The lessons must go on! She must swallow down\
      her scruples, and June must put her feelings in her pocket. She\
      had done so once, on the day after the news of Bosinney\'92s death;\
      what she had done then, she could surely do again now. Four years\
      since that injury was inflicted on her\'97not Christian to keep the\
      memory of old sores alive. June\'92s will was strong, but his was\
      stronger, for his sands were running out. Irene was soft, surely\
      she would do this for him, subdue her natural shrinking, sooner\
      than give him pain! The lessons must continue; for if they did,\
      he was secure. And lighting his cigar at last, he began trying to\
      shape out how to put it to them all, and explain this strange\
      intimacy; how to veil and wrap it away from the naked truth\'97that\
      he could not bear to be deprived of the sight of beauty. Ah!\
      Holly! Holly was fond of her, Holly liked her lessons. She would\
      save him\'97his little sweet! And with that happy thought he became\
      serene, and wondered what he had been worrying about so\
      fearfully. He must not worry, it left him always curiously weak,\
      and as if but half present in his own body.\
\
      That evening after dinner he had a return of the dizziness,\
      though he did not faint. He would not ring the bell, because he\
      knew it would mean a fuss, and make his going up on the morrow\
      more conspicuous. When one grew old, the whole world was in\
      conspiracy to limit freedom, and for what reason?\'97just to keep\
      the breath in him a little longer. He did not want it at such\
      cost. Only the dog Balthasar saw his lonely recovery from that\
      weakness; anxiously watched his master go to the sideboard and\
      drink some brandy, instead of giving him a biscuit. When at last\
      old Jolyon felt able to tackle the stairs he went up to bed. And,\
      though still shaky next morning, the thought of the evening\
      sustained and strengthened him. It was always such a pleasure to\
      give her a good dinner\'97he suspected her of undereating when she\
      was alone; and, at the opera to watch her eyes glow and brighten,\
      the unconscious smiling of her lips. She hadn\'92t much pleasure,\
      and this was the last time he would be able to give her that\
      treat. But when he was packing his bag he caught himself wishing\
      that he had not the fatigue of dressing for dinner before him,\
      and the exertion, too, of telling her about June\'92s return.\
\
      The opera that evening was \'93Carmen,\'94 and he chose the last\
      _entr\'92acte_ to break the news, instinctively putting it off till\
      the latest moment.\
\
      She took it quietly, queerly; in fact, he did not know how she\
      had taken it before the wayward music lifted up again and silence\
      became necessary. The mask was down over her face, that mask\
      behind which so much went on that he could not see. She wanted\
      time to think it over, no doubt! He would not press her, for she\
      would be coming to give her lesson to-morrow afternoon, and he\
      should see her then when she had got used to the idea. In the cab\
      he talked only of the Carmen; he had seen better in the old days,\
      but this one was not bad at all. When he took her hand to say\
      good-night, she bent quickly forward and kissed his forehead.\
\
      \'93Good-bye, dear Uncle Jolyon, you have been so sweet to me.\'94\
\
      \'93To-morrow then,\'94 he said. \'93Good-night. Sleep well.\'94 She echoed\
      softly: \'93Sleep well\'94 and from the cab window, already moving\
      away, he saw her face screwed round towards him, and her hand put\
      out in a gesture which seemed to linger.\
\
      He sought his room slowly. They never gave him the same, and he\
      could not get used to these \'93spick-and-spandy\'94 bedrooms with new\
      furniture and grey-green carpets sprinkled all over with pink\
      roses. He was wakeful and that wretched Habanera kept throbbing\
      in his head.\
\
      His French had never been equal to its words, but its sense he\
      knew, if it had any sense, a gipsy thing\'97wild and unaccountable.\
      Well, there _was_ in life something which upset all your care and\
      plans\'97something which made men and women dance to its pipes. And\
      he lay staring from deep-sunk eyes into the darkness where the\
      unaccountable held sway. You thought you had hold of life, but it\
      slipped away behind you, took you by the scruff of the neck,\
      forced you here and forced you there, and then, likely as not,\
      squeezed life out of you! It took the very stars like that, he\
      shouldn\'92t wonder, rubbed their noses together and flung them\
      apart; it had never done playing its pranks. Five million people\
      in this great blunderbuss of a town, and all of them at the mercy\
      of that Life-Force, like a lot of little dried peas hopping about\
      on a board when you struck your fist on it. Ah, well! Himself\
      would not hop much longer\'97a good long sleep would do him good!\
\
      How hot it was up here!\'97how noisy! His forehead burned; she had\
      kissed it just where he always worried; just there\'97as if she had\
      known the very place and wanted to kiss it all away for him. But,\
      instead, her lips left a patch of grievous uneasiness. She had\
      never spoken in quite that voice, had never before made that\
      lingering gesture or looked back at him as she drove away.\
\
      He got out of bed and pulled the curtains aside; his room faced\
      down over the river. There was little air, but the sight of that\
      breadth of water flowing by, calm, eternal, soothed him. \'93The\
      great thing,\'94 he thought \'93is not to make myself a nuisance. I\'92ll\
      think of my little sweet, and go to sleep.\'94 But it was long\
      before the heat and throbbing of the London night died out into\
      the short slumber of the summer morning. And old Jolyon had but\
      forty winks.\
\
      When he reached home next day he went out to the flower garden,\
      and with the help of Holly, who was very delicate with flowers,\
      gathered a great bunch of carnations. They were, he told her, for\
      \'93the lady in grey\'94\'97a name still bandied between them; and he put\
      them in a bowl in his study where he meant to tackle Irene the\
      moment she came, on the subject of June and future lessons. Their\
      fragrance and colour would help. After lunch he lay down, for he\
      felt very tired, and the carriage would not bring her from the\
      station till four o\'92clock. But as the hour approached he grew\
      restless, and sought the schoolroom, which overlooked the drive.\
      The sun-blinds were down, and Holly was there with Mademoiselle\
      Beauce, sheltered from the heat of a stifling July day, attending\
      to their silkworms. Old Jolyon had a natural antipathy to these\
      methodical creatures, whose heads and colour reminded him of\
      elephants; who nibbled such quantities of holes in nice green\
      leaves; and smelled, as he thought, horrid. He sat down on a\
      chintz-covered windowseat whence he could see the drive, and get\
      what air there was; and the dog Balthasar who appreciated chintz\
      on hot days, jumped up beside him. Over the cottage piano a\
      violet dust-sheet, faded almost to grey, was spread, and on it\
      the first lavender, whose scent filled the room. In spite of the\
      coolness here, perhaps because of that coolness the beat of life\
      vehemently impressed his ebbed-down senses. Each sunbeam which\
      came through the chinks had annoying brilliance; that dog smelled\
      very strong; the lavender perfume was overpowering; those\
      silkworms heaving up their grey-green backs seemed horribly\
      alive; and Holly\'92s dark head bent over them had a wonderfully\
      silky sheen. A marvellous cruelly strong thing was life when you\
      were old and weak; it seemed to mock you with its multitude of\
      forms and its beating vitality. He had never, till those last few\
      weeks, had this curious feeling of being with one half of him\
      eagerly borne along in the stream of life, and with the other\
      half left on the bank, watching that helpless progress. Only when\
      Irene was with him did he lose this double consciousness.\
\
      Holly turned her head, pointed with her little brown fist to the\
      piano\'97for to point with a finger was not \'93well-brrred\'94\'97and said\
      slyly:\
\
      \'93Look at the \'91lady in grey,\'92 Gran; isn\'92t she pretty to-day?\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon\'92s heart gave a flutter, and for a second the room was\
      clouded; then it cleared, and he said with a twinkle:\
\
      \'93Who\'92s been dressing her up?\'94\
\
      \'93Mam\'92zelle.\'94\
\
      \'93Hollee! Don\'92t be foolish!\'94\
\
      That prim little Frenchwoman! She hadn\'92t yet got over the music\
      lessons being taken away from her. That wouldn\'92t help. His little\
      sweet was the only friend they had. Well, they were her lessons.\
      And he shouldn\'92t budge shouldn\'92t budge for anything. He stroked\
      the warm wool on Balthasar\'92s head, and heard Holly say: \'93When\
      mother\'92s home, there won\'92t be any changes, will there? She\
      doesn\'92t like strangers, you know.\'94\
\
      The child\'92s words seemed to bring the chilly atmosphere of\
      opposition about old Jolyon, and disclose all the menace to his\
      new-found freedom. Ah! He would have to resign himself to being\
      an old man at the mercy of care and love, or fight to keep this\
      new and prized companionship; and to fight tired him to death.\
      But his thin, worn face hardened into resolution till it appeared\
      all Jaw. This was his house, and his affair; he should not budge!\
      He looked at his watch, old and thin like himself; he had owned\
      it fifty years. Past four already! And kissing the top of Holly\'92s\
      head in passing, he went down to the hall. He wanted to get hold\
      of her before she went up to give her lesson. At the first sound\
      of wheels he stepped out into the porch, and saw at once that the\
      victoria was empty.\
\
      \'93The train\'92s in, sir; but the lady \'92asn\'92t come.\'94\
\
      Old Jolyon gave him a sharp upward look, his eyes seemed to push\
      away that fat chap\'92s curiosity, and defy him to see the bitter\
      disappointment he was feeling.\
\
      \'93Very well,\'94 he said, and turned back into the house. He went to\
      his study and sat down, quivering like a leaf. What did this\
      mean? She might have lost her train, but he knew well enough she\
      hadn\'92t. \'93Good-bye, dear Uncle Jolyon.\'94 Why \'93Good-bye\'94 and not\
      \'93Good-night\'94. And that hand of hers lingering in the air. And her\
      kiss. What did it mean? Vehement alarm and irritation took\
      possession of him. He got up and began to pace the Turkey carpet,\
      between window and wall. She was going to give him up! He felt it\
      for certain\'97and he defenceless. An old man wanting to look on\
      beauty! It was ridiculous! Age closed his mouth, paralysed his\
      power to fight. He had no right to what was warm and living, no\
      right to anything but memories and sorrow. He could not plead\
      with her; even an old man has his dignity. Defenceless! For an\
      hour, lost to bodily fatigue, he paced up and down, past the bowl\
      of carnations he had plucked, which mocked him with its scent. Of\
      all things hard to bear, the prostration of will-power is\
      hardest, for one who has always had his way. Nature had got him\
      in its net, and like an unhappy fish he turned and swam at the\
      meshes, here and there, found no hole, no breaking point. They\
      brought him tea at five o\'92clock, and a letter. For a moment hope\
      beat up in him. He cut the envelope with the butter knife, and\
      read:\
\
      \'93DEAREST UNCLE JOLYON,\'97I can\'92t bear to write anything that may\
      disappoint you, but I was too cowardly to tell you last night. I\
      feel I can\'92t come down and give Holly any more lessons, now that\
      June is coming back. Some things go too deep to be forgotten. It\
      has been such a joy to see you and Holly. Perhaps I shall still\
      see you sometimes when you come up, though I\'92m sure it\'92s not good\
      for you; I can see you are tiring yourself too much. I believe\
      you ought to rest quite quietly all this hot weather, and now you\
      have your son and June coming back you will be so happy. Thank\
      you a million times for all your sweetness to me.\
\
      \'93Lovingly your\
      IRENE.\'94\
\
      So, there it was! Not good for him to have pleasure and what he\
      chiefly cared about; to try and put off feeling the inevitable\
      end of all things, the approach of death with its stealthy,\
      rustling footsteps. Not good for him! Not even she could see how\
      she was his new lease of interest in life, the incarnation of all\
      the beauty he felt slipping from him.\
\
      His tea grew cold, his cigar remained unlit; and up and down he\
      paced, torn between his dignity and his hold on life. Intolerable\
      to be squeezed out slowly, without a say of your own, to live on\
      when your will was in the hands of others bent on weighing you to\
      the ground with care and love. Intolerable! He would see what\
      telling her the truth would do\'97the truth that he wanted the sight\
      of her more than just a lingering on. He sat down at his old\
      bureau and took a pen. But he could not write. There was\
      something revolting in having to plead like this; plead that she\
      should warm his eyes with her beauty. It was tantamount to\
      confessing dotage. He simply could not. And instead, he wrote:\
\
      \'93I had hoped that the memory of old sores would not be allowed to\
      stand in the way of what is a pleasure and a profit to me and my\
      little grand-daughter. But old men learn to forego their whims;\
      they are obliged to, even the whim to live must be foregone\
      sooner or later; and perhaps the sooner the better.\
\
      \'93My love to you,\
      \'93JOLYON FORSYTE.\'94\
\
      \'93Bitter,\'94 he thought, \'93but I can\'92t help it. I\'92m tired.\'94 He sealed\
      and dropped it into the box for the evening post, and hearing it\
      fall to the bottom, thought: \'93There goes all I\'92ve looked forward\
      to!\'94\
\
      That evening after dinner which he scarcely touched, after his\
      cigar which he left half-smoked for it made him feel faint, he\
      went very slowly upstairs and stole into the night-nursery. He\
      sat down on the window-seat. A night-light was burning, and he\
      could just see Holly\'92s face, with one hand underneath the cheek.\
      An early cockchafer buzzed in the Japanese paper with which they\
      had filled the grate, and one of the horses in the stable stamped\
      restlessly. To sleep like that child! He pressed apart two rungs\
      of the venetian blind and looked out. The moon was rising,\
      blood-red. He had never seen so red a moon. The woods and fields\
      out there were dropping to sleep too, in the last glimmer of the\
      summer light. And beauty, like a spirit, walked. \'93I\'92ve had a long\
      life,\'94 he thought, \'93the best of nearly everything. I\'92m an\
      ungrateful chap; I\'92ve seen a lot of beauty in my time. Poor young\
      Bosinney said I had a sense of beauty. There\'92s a man in the moon\
      to-night!\'94 A moth went by, another, another. \'93Ladies in grey!\'94 He\
      closed his eyes. A feeling that he would never open them again\
      beset him; he let it grow, let himself sink; then, with a shiver,\
      dragged the lids up. There was something wrong with him, no\
      doubt, deeply wrong; he would have to have the doctor after all.\
      It didn\'92t much matter now! Into that coppice the moonlight would\
      have crept; there would be shadows, and those shadows would be\
      the only things awake. No birds, beasts, flowers, insects; Just\
      the shadows \'97moving; \'93Ladies in grey!\'94 Over that log they would\
      climb; would whisper together. She and Bosinney! Funny thought!\
      And the frogs and little things would whisper too! How the clock\
      ticked, in here! It was all eerie\'97out there in the light of that\
      red moon; in here with the little steady night-light and, the\
      ticking clock and the nurse\'92s dressing-gown hanging from the edge\
      of the screen, tall, like a woman\'92s figure. \'93Lady in grey!\'94 And a\
      very odd thought beset him: Did she exist? Had she ever come at\
      all? Or was she but the emanation of all the beauty he had loved\
      and must leave so soon? The violet-grey spirit with the dark eyes\
      and the crown of amber hair, who walks the dawn and the\
      moonlight, and at blue-bell time? What was she, who was she, did\
      she exist? He rose and stood a moment clutching the window-sill,\
      to give him a sense of reality again; then began tiptoeing\
      towards the door. He stopped at the foot of the bed; and Holly,\
      as if conscious of his eyes fixed on her, stirred, sighed, and\
      curled up closer in defence. He tiptoed on and passed out into\
      the dark passage; reached his room, undressed at once, and stood\
      before a mirror in his night-shirt. What a scarecrow\'97with temples\
      fallen in, and thin legs! His eyes resisted his own image, and a\
      look of pride came on his face. All was in league to pull him\
      down, even his reflection in the glass, but he was not down\'97yet!\
      He got into bed, and lay a long time without sleeping, trying to\
      reach resignation, only too well aware that fretting and\
      disappointment were very bad for him.\
\
      He woke in the morning so unrefreshed and strengthless that he\
      sent for the doctor. After sounding him, the fellow pulled a face\
      as long as your arm, and ordered him to stay in bed and give up\
      smoking. That was no hardship; there was nothing to get up for,\
      and when he felt ill, tobacco always lost its savour. He spent\
      the morning languidly with the sun-blinds down, turning and\
      re-turning _The Times_, not reading much, the dog Balthasar lying\
      beside his bed. With his lunch they brought him a telegram,\
      running thus:\
\
      \'93Your letter received coming down this afternoon will be with you\
      at four-thirty. Irene.\'94\
\
      Coming down! After all! Then she did exist\'97and he was not\
      deserted. Coming down! A glow ran through his limbs; his cheeks\
      and forehead felt hot. He drank his soup, and pushed the\
      tray-table away, lying very quiet until they had removed lunch\
      and left him alone; but every now and then his eyes twinkled.\
      Coming down! His heart beat fast, and then did not seem to beat\
      at all. At three o\'92clock he got up and dressed deliberately,\
      noiselessly. Holly and Mam\'92zelle would be in the schoolroom, and\
      the servants asleep after their dinner, he shouldn\'92t wonder. He\
      opened his door cautiously, and went downstairs. In the hall the\
      dog Balthasar lay solitary, and, followed by him, old Jolyon\
      passed into his study and out into the burning afternoon. He\
      meant to go down and meet her in the coppice, but felt at once he\
      could not manage that in this heat. He sat down instead under the\
      oak tree by the swing, and the dog Balthasar, who also felt the\
      heat, lay down beside him. He sat there smiling. What a revel of\
      bright minutes! What a hum of insects, and cooing of pigeons! It\
      was the quintessence of a summer day. Lovely! And he was\
      happy\'97happy as a sand-boy, whatever that might be. She was\
      coming; she had not given him up! He had everything in life he\
      wanted\'97except a little more breath, and less weight\'97just here! He\
      would see her when she emerged from the fernery, come swaying\
      just a little, a violet-grey figure passing over the daisies and\
      dandelions and \'93soldiers\'94 on the lawn\'97the soldiers with their\
      flowery crowns. He would not move, but she would come up to him\
      and say: \'93Dear Uncle Jolyon, I am sorry!\'94 and sit in the swing\
      and let him look at her and tell her that he had not been very\
      well but was all right now; and that dog would lick her hand.\
      That dog knew his master was fond of her; that dog was a good\
      dog.\
\
      It was quite shady under the tree; the sun could not get at him,\
      only make the rest of the world bright so that he could see the\
      Grand Stand at Epsom away out there, very far, and the cows\
      cropping the clover in the field and swishing at the flies with\
      their tails. He smelled the scent of limes, and lavender. Ah!\
      that was why there was such a racket of bees. They were\
      excited\'97busy, as his heart was busy and excited. Drowsy, too,\
      drowsy and drugged on honey and happiness; as his heart was\
      drugged and drowsy. Summer\'97summer\'97they seemed saying; great bees\
      and little bees, and the flies too!\
\
      The stable clock struck four; in half an hour she would be here.\
      He would have just one tiny nap, because he had had so little\
      sleep of late; and then he would be fresh for her, fresh for\
      youth and beauty, coming towards him across the sunlit lawn\'97lady\
      in grey! And settling back in his chair he closed his eyes. Some\
      thistle-down came on what little air there was, and pitched on\
      his moustache more white than itself. He did not know; but his\
      breathing stirred it, caught there. A ray of sunlight struck\
      through and lodged on his boot. A bumble-bee alighted and\
      strolled on the crown of his Panama hat. And the delicious surge\
      of slumber reached the brain beneath that hat, and the head\
      swayed forward and rested on his breast. Summer\'97summer! So went\
      the hum.\
\
      The stable clock struck the quarter past. The dog Balthasar\
      stretched and looked up at his master. The thistledown no longer\
      moved. The dog placed his chin over the sunlit foot. It did not\
      stir. The dog withdrew his chin quickly, rose, and leaped on old\
      Jolyon\'92s lap, looked in his face, whined; then, leaping down, sat\
      on his haunches, gazing up. And suddenly he uttered a long, long\
      howl.\
\
      But the thistledown was still as death, and the face of his old\
      master.\
\
      Summer\'97summer\'97summer! The soundless footsteps on the grass! 1917\
\
\
\
\
      IN CHANCERY\
\
     Two households both alike in dignity,\
     From ancient grudge, break into new mutiny.\
                    \'97_Romeo and Juliet_\
\
      TO JESSIE AND JOSEPH CONRAD\
\
\
\
\
      PART 1\
\
      CHAPTER I AT TIMOTHY\'92S\
\
\
      The possessive instinct never stands still. Through florescence\
      and feud, frosts and fires, it followed the laws of progression\
      even in the Forsyte family which had believed it fixed for ever.\
      Nor can it be dissociated from environment any more than the\
      quality of potato from the soil.\
\
      The historian of the English eighties and nineties will, in his\
      good time, depict the somewhat rapid progression from\
      self-contented and contained provincialism to still more\
      self-contented if less contained imperialism\'97in other words, the\
      \'93possessive\'94 instinct of the nation on the move. And so, as if in\
      conformity, was it with the Forsyte family. They were spreading\
      not merely on the surface, but within.\
\
      When, in 1895, Susan Hayman, the married Forsyte sister, followed\
      her husband at the ludicrously low age of seventy-four, and was\
      cremated, it made strangely little stir among the six old\
      Forsytes left. For this apathy there were three causes. First:\
      the almost surreptitious burial of old Jolyon in 1892 down at\
      Robin Hill\'97first of the Forsytes to desert the family grave at\
      Highgate. That burial, coming a year after Swithin\'92s entirely\
      proper funeral, had occasioned a great deal of talk on Forsyte\
      \'92Change, the abode of Timothy Forsyte on the Bayswater Road,\
      London, which still collected and radiated family gossip.\
      Opinions ranged from the lamentation of Aunt Juley to the\
      outspoken assertion of Francie that it was \'93a jolly good thing to\
      stop all that stuffy Highgate business.\'94 Uncle Jolyon in his\
      later years\'97indeed, ever since the strange and lamentable affair\
      between his granddaughter June\'92s lover, young Bosinney, and\
      Irene, his nephew Soames Forsyte\'92s wife\'97had noticeably rapped the\
      family\'92s knuckles; and that way of his own which he had always\
      taken had begun to seem to them a little wayward. The philosophic\
      vein in him, of course, had always been too liable to crop out of\
      the strata of pure Forsyteism, so they were in a way prepared for\
      his interment in a strange spot. But the whole thing was an odd\
      business, and when the contents of his Will became current coin\
      on Forsyte \'92Change, a shiver had gone round the clan. Out of his\
      estate (\'a3145,304 gross, with liabilities \'a335 7s. 4d.) he had\
      actually left \'a315,000 to \'93whomever do you think, my dear? To\
      _Irene!_\'94 that runaway wife of his nephew Soames; Irene, a woman\
      who had almost disgraced the family, and\'97still more amazing was\
      to him no blood relation. Not out and out, of course; only a life\
      interest\'97only the income from it! Still, there it was; and old\
      Jolyon\'92s claim to be the perfect Forsyte was ended once for all.\
      That, then, was the first reason why the burial of Susan\
      Hayman\'97at Woking\'97made little stir.\
\
      The second reason was altogether more expansive and imperial.\
      Besides the house on Campden Hill, Susan had a place (left her by\
      Hayman when he died) just over the border in Hants, where the\
      Hayman boys had learned to be such good shots and riders, as it\
      was believed, which was of course nice for them, and creditable\
      to everybody; and the fact of owning something really countrified\
      seemed somehow to excuse the dispersion of her remains\'97though\
      what could have put cremation into her head they could not think!\
      The usual invitations, however, had been issued, and Soames had\
      gone down and young Nicholas, and the Will had been quite\
      satisfactory so far as it went, for she had only had a life\
      interest; and everything had gone quite smoothly to the children\
      in equal shares.\
\
      The third reason why Susan\'92s burial made little stir was the most\
      expansive of all. It was summed up daringly by Euphemia, the\
      pale, the thin: \'93Well, _I_ think people have a right to their own\
      bodies, even when they\'92re dead.\'94 Coming from a daughter of\
      Nicholas, a Liberal of the old school and most tyrannical, it was\
      a startling remark\'97showing in a flash what a lot of water had run\
      under bridges since the death of Aunt Ann in \'9286, just when the\
      proprietorship of Soames over his wife\'92s body was acquiring the\
      uncertainty which had led to such disaster. Euphemia, of course,\
      spoke like a child, and had no experience; for though well over\
      thirty by now, her name was still Forsyte. But, making all\
      allowances, her remark did undoubtedly show expansion of the\
      principle of liberty, decentralisation and shift in the central\
      point of possession from others to oneself. When Nicholas heard\
      his daughter\'92s remark from Aunt Hester he had rapped out: \'93Wives\
      and daughters! There\'92s no end to their liberty in these days. I\
      knew that \'91Jackson\'92 case would lead to things\'97lugging in Habeas\
      Corpus like that!\'94 He had, of course, never really forgiven the\
      Married Woman\'92s Property Act, which would so have interfered with\
      him if he had not mercifully married before it was passed. But,\
      in truth, there was no denying the revolt among the younger\
      Forsytes against being owned by others; that, as it were,\
      Colonial disposition to own oneself, which is the paradoxical\
      forerunner of Imperialism, was making progress all the time. They\
      were all now married, except George, confirmed to the Turf and\
      the Iseeum Club; Francie, pursuing her musical career in a studio\
      off the King\'92s Road, Chelsea, and still taking \'93lovers\'94 to\
      dances; Euphemia, living at home and complaining of Nicholas; and\
      those two Dromios, Giles and Jesse Hayman. Of the third\
      generation there were not very many\'97young Jolyon had three,\
      Winifred Dartie four, young Nicholas six already, young Roger had\
      one, Marian Tweetyman one; St. John Hayman two. But the rest of\
      the sixteen married\'97Soames, Rachel and Cicely of James\'92 family;\
      Eustace and Thomas of Roger\'92s; Ernest, Archibald and Florence of\
      Nicholas\'92. Augustus and Annabel Spender of the Hayman\'92s\'97were\
      going down the years unreproduced.\
\
      Thus, of the ten old Forsytes twenty-one young Forsytes had been\
      born; but of the twenty-one young Forsytes there were as yet only\
      seventeen descendants; and it already seemed unlikely that there\
      would be more than a further unconsidered trifle or so. A student\
      of statistics must have noticed that the birth rate had varied in\
      accordance with the rate of interest for your money. Grandfather\
      \'93Superior Dosset\'94 Forsyte in the early nineteenth century had\
      been getting ten per cent. for his, hence ten children. Those\
      ten, leaving out the four who had not married, and Juley, whose\
      husband Septimus Small had, of course, died almost at once, had\
      averaged from four to five per cent. for theirs, and produced\
      accordingly. The twenty-one whom they produced were now getting\
      barely three per cent. in the Consols to which their father had\
      mostly tied the Settlements they made to avoid death duties, and\
      the six of them who had been reproduced had seventeen children,\
      or just the proper two and five-sixths per stem.\
\
      There were other reasons, too, for this mild reproduction. A\
      distrust of their earning powers, natural where a sufficiency is\
      guaranteed, together with the knowledge that their fathers did\
      not die, kept them cautious. If one had children and not much\
      income, the standard of taste and comfort must of necessity go\
      down; what was enough for two was not enough for four, and so\
      on\'97it would be better to wait and see what Father did. Besides,\
      it was nice to be able to take holidays unhampered. Sooner in\
      fact than own children, they preferred to concentrate on the\
      ownership of themselves, conforming to the growing tendency _fin\
      de si\'e8cle_, as it was called. In this way, little risk was run,\
      and one would be able to have a motor-car. Indeed, Eustace\
      already had one, but it had shaken him horribly, and broken one\
      of his eye teeth; so that it would be better to wait till they\
      were a little safer. In the meantime, no more children! Even\
      young Nicholas was drawing in his horns, and had made no addition\
      to his six for quite three years.\
\
      The corporate decay, however, of the Forsytes, their dispersion\
      rather, of which all this was symptomatic, had not advanced so\
      far as to prevent a rally when Roger Forsyte died in 1899. It had\
      been a glorious summer, and after holidays abroad and at the sea\
      they were practically all back in London, when Roger with a touch\
      of his old originality had suddenly breathed his last at his own\
      house in Princes Gardens. At Timothy\'92s it was whispered sadly\
      that poor Roger had always been eccentric about his digestion\'97had\
      he not, for instance, preferred German mutton to all the other\
      brands?\
\
      Be that as it may, his funeral at Highgate had been perfect, and\
      coming away from it Soames Forsyte made almost mechanically for\
      his Uncle Timothy\'92s in the Bayswater Road. The \'93Old Things\'94\'97Aunt\
      Juley and Aunt Hester\'97would like to hear about it. His\
      father\'97James\'97at eighty-eight had not felt up to the fatigue of\
      the funeral; and Timothy himself, of course, had not gone; so\
      that Nicholas had been the only brother present. Still, there had\
      been a fair gathering; and it would cheer Aunts Juley and Hester\
      up to know. The kindly thought was not unmixed with the\
      inevitable longing to get something out of everything you do,\
      which is the chief characteristic of Forsytes, and indeed of the\
      saner elements in every nation. In this practice of taking family\
      matters to Timothy\'92s in the Bayswater Road, Soames was but\
      following in the footsteps of his father, who had been in the\
      habit of going at least once a week to see his sisters at\
      Timothy\'92s, and had only given it up when he lost his nerve at\
      eighty-six, and could not go out without Emily. To go with Emily\
      was of no use, for who could really talk to anyone in the\
      presence of his own wife? Like James in the old days, Soames\
      found time to go there nearly every Sunday, and sit in the little\
      drawing-room into which, with his undoubted taste, he had\
      introduced a good deal of change and china not quite up to his\
      own fastidious mark, and at least two rather doubtful Barbizon\
      pictures, at Christmastides. He himself, who had done extremely\
      well with the Barbizons, had for some years past moved towards\
      the Marises, Israels, and Mauve, and was hoping to do better. In\
      the riverside house which he now inhabited near Mapledurham he\
      had a gallery, beautifully hung and lighted, to which few London\
      dealers were strangers. It served, too, as a Sunday afternoon\
      attraction in those week-end parties which his sisters, Winifred\
      or Rachel, occasionally organised for him. For though he was but\
      a taciturn showman, his quiet collected determinism seldom failed\
      to influence his guests, who knew that his reputation was\
      grounded not on mere aesthetic fancy, but on his power of gauging\
      the future of market values. When he went to Timothy\'92s he almost\
      always had some little tale of triumph over a dealer to unfold,\
      and dearly he loved that coo of pride with which his aunts would\
      greet it. This afternoon, however, he was differently animated,\
      coming from Roger\'92s funeral in his neat dark clothes\'97not quite\
      black, for after all an uncle was but an uncle, and his soul\
      abhorred excessive display of feeling. Leaning back in a\
      marqueterie chair and gazing down his uplifted nose at the\
      sky-blue walls plastered with gold frames, he was noticeably\
      silent. Whether because he had been to a funeral or not, the\
      peculiar Forsyte build of his face was seen to the best advantage\
      this afternoon\'97a face concave and long, with a jaw which divested\
      of flesh would have seemed extravagant: altogether a chinny face\
      though not at all ill-looking. He was feeling more strongly than\
      ever that Timothy\'92s was hopelessly \'93rum-ti-too\'94 and the souls of\
      his aunts dismally mid-Victorian. The subject on which alone he\
      wanted to talk\'97his own undivorced position\'97was unspeakable. And\
      yet it occupied his mind to the exclusion of all else. It was\
      only since the Spring that this had been so and a new feeling\
      grown up which was egging him on towards what he knew might well\
      be folly in a Forsyte of forty-five. More and more of late he had\
      been conscious that he was \'93getting on.\'94 The fortune already\
      considerable when he conceived the house at Robin Hill which had\
      finally wrecked his marriage with Irene, had mounted with\
      surprising vigour in the twelve lonely years during which he had\
      devoted himself to little else. He was worth to-day well over a\
      hundred thousand pounds, and had no one to leave it to\'97no real\
      object for going on with what was his religion. Even if he were\
      to relax his efforts, money made money, and he felt that he would\
      have a hundred and fifty thousand before he knew where he was.\
      There had always been a strongly domestic, philoprogenitive side\
      to Soames; baulked and frustrated, it had hidden itself away, but\
      now had crept out again in this his \'93prime of life.\'94 Concreted\
      and focussed of late by the attraction of a girl\'92s undoubted\
      beauty, it had become a veritable prepossession.\
\
      And this girl was French, not likely to lose her head, or accept\
      any unlegalised position. Moreover, Soames himself disliked the\
      thought of that. He had tasted of the sordid side of sex during\
      those long years of forced celibacy, secretively, and always with\
      disgust, for he was fastidious, and his sense of law and order\
      innate. He wanted no hole and corner liaison. A marriage at the\
      Embassy in Paris, a few months\'92 travel, and he could bring\
      Annette back quite separated from a past which in truth was not\
      too distinguished, for she only kept the accounts in her mother\'92s\
      Soho Restaurant; he could bring her back as something very new\
      and chic with her French taste and self-possession, to reign at\
      \'93The Shelter\'94 near Mapledurham. On Forsyte \'92Change and among his\
      riverside friends it would be current that he had met a charming\
      French girl on his travels and married her. There would be the\
      flavour of romance, and a certain _cachet_ about a French wife.\
      No! He was not at all afraid of that. It was only this cursed\
      undivorced condition of his, and\'97and the question whether Annette\
      would take him, which he dared not put to the touch until he had\
      a clear and even dazzling future to offer her.\
\
      In his aunts\'92 drawing-room he heard with but muffled ears those\
      usual questions: How was his dear father? Not going out, of\
      course, now that the weather was turning chilly? Would Soames be\
      sure to tell him that Hester had found boiled holly leaves most\
      comforting for that pain in her side; a poultice every three\
      hours, with red flannel afterwards. And could he relish just a\
      little pot of their very best prune preserve\'97it was so delicious\
      this year, and had such a wonderful effect. Oh! and about the\
      Darties\'97_had_ Soames heard that dear Winifred was having a most\
      distressing time with Montague? Timothy thought she really ought\
      to have protection It was said\'97but Soames mustn\'92t take this for\
      certain\'97that he had given some of Winifred\'92s jewellery to a\
      dreadful dancer. It was such a bad example for dear Val just as\
      he was going to college. Soames had not heard? Oh, but he must go\
      and see his sister and look into it at once! And did he think\
      these Boers were really going to resist? Timothy was in quite a\
      stew about it. The price of Consols was so high, and he had such\
      a lot of money in them. Did Soames think they must go down if\
      there was a war? Soames nodded. But it would be over very\
      quickly. It would be so bad for Timothy if it wasn\'92t. And of\
      course Soames\'92 dear father would feel it very much at his age.\
      Luckily poor dear Roger had been spared this dreadful anxiety.\
      And Aunt Juley with a little handkerchief wiped away the large\
      tear trying to climb the permanent pout on her now quite withered\
      left cheek; she was remembering dear Roger, and all his\
      originality, and how he used to stick pins into her when they\
      were little together. Aunt Hester, with her instinct for avoiding\
      the unpleasant, here chimed in: Did Soames think they would make\
      Mr. Chamberlain Prime Minister at once? He would settle it all so\
      quickly. She would like to see that old Kruger sent to St.\
      Helena. She could remember so well the news of Napoleon\'92s death,\
      and what a relief it had been to his grandfather. Of course she\
      and Juley\'97\'93We were in pantalettes then, my dear\'94\'97had not felt it\
      much at the time.\
\
      Soames took a cup of tea from her, drank it quickly, and ate\
      three of those macaroons for which Timothy\'92s was famous. His\
      faint, pale, supercilious smile had deepened just a little.\
      Really, his family remained hopelessly provincial, however much\
      of London they might possess between them. In these go-ahead days\
      their provincialism stared out even more than it used to. Why,\
      old Nicholas was still a Free Trader, and a member of that\
      antediluvian home of Liberalism, the Remove Club\'97though, to be\
      sure, the members were pretty well all Conservatives now, or he\
      himself could not have joined; and Timothy, they said, still wore\
      a nightcap. Aunt Juley spoke again. Dear Soames was looking so\
      well, hardly a day older than he did when dear Ann died, and they\
      were all there together, dear Jolyon, and dear Swithin, and dear\
      Roger. She paused and caught the tear which had climbed the pout\
      on her right cheek. Did he\'97did he ever hear anything of Irene\
      nowadays? Aunt Hester visibly interposed her shoulder. Really,\
      Juley was always saying something! The smile left Soames\'92 face,\
      and he put his cup down. Here was his subject broached for him,\
      and for all his desire to expand, he could not take advantage.\
\
      Aunt Juley went on rather hastily:\
\
      \'93They say dear Jolyon first left her that fifteen thousand out\
      and out; then of course he saw it would not be right, and made it\
      for her life only.\'94\
\
      Had Soames heard that?\
\
      Soames nodded.\
\
      \'93Your cousin Jolyon is a widower now. He is her trustee; you knew\
      that, of course?\'94\
\
      Soames shook his head. He did know, but wished to show no\
      interest. Young Jolyon and he had not met since the day of\
      Bosinney\'92s death.\
\
      \'93He must be quite middle-aged by now,\'94 went on Aunt Juley\
      dreamily. \'93Let me see, he was born when your dear uncle lived in\
      Mount Street; long before they went to Stanhope Gate in December.\
      Just before that dreadful Commune. Over fifty! Fancy that! Such a\
      pretty baby, and we were all so proud of him; the very first of\
      you all.\'94 Aunt Juley sighed, and a lock of not quite her own hair\
      came loose and straggled, so that Aunt Hester gave a little\
      shiver. Soames rose, he was experiencing a curious piece of\
      self-discovery. That old wound to his pride and self-esteem was\
      not yet closed. He had come thinking he could talk of it, even\
      wanting to talk of his fettered condition, and\'97behold! he was\
      shrinking away from this reminder by Aunt Juley, renowned for her\
      Malapropisms.\
\
      Oh, Soames was not going already!\
\
      Soames smiled a little vindictively, and said:\
\
      \'93Yes. Good-bye. Remember me to Uncle Timothy!\'94 And, leaving a\
      cold kiss on each forehead, whose wrinkles seemed to try and\
      cling to his lips as if longing to be kissed away, he left them\
      looking brightly after him\'97dear Soames, it had been so good of\
      him to come to-day, when they were not feeling very...!\
\
      With compunction tweaking at his chest Soames descended the\
      stairs, where was always that rather pleasant smell of camphor\
      and port wine, and house where draughts are not permitted. The\
      poor old things\'97he had not meant to be unkind! And in the street\
      he instantly forgot them, repossessed by the image of Annette and\
      the thought of the cursed coil around him. Why had he not pushed\
      the thing through and obtained divorce when that wretched\
      Bosinney was run over, and there was evidence galore for the\
      asking! And he turned towards his sister Winifred Dartie\'92s\
      residence in Green Street, Mayfair.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER II EXIT A MAN OF THE WORLD\
\
\
      That a man of the world so subject to the vicissitudes of\
      fortunes as Montague Dartie should still be living in a house he\
      had inhabited twenty years at least would have been more\
      noticeable if the rent, rates, taxes, and repairs of that house\
      had not been defrayed by his father-in-law. By that simple if\
      wholesale device James Forsyte had secured a certain stability in\
      the lives of his daughter and his grandchildren. After all, there\
      is something invaluable about a safe roof over the head of a\
      sportsman so dashing as Dartie. Until the events of the last few\
      days he had been almost-supernaturally steady all this year. The\
      fact was he had acquired a half share in a filly of George\
      Forsyte\'92s, who had gone irreparably on the turf, to the horror of\
      Roger, now stilled by the grave. Sleeve-links, by Martyr, out of\
      Shirt-on-fire, by Suspender, was a bay filly, three years old,\
      who for a variety of reasons had never shown her true form. With\
      half ownership of this hopeful animal, all the idealism latent\
      somewhere in Dartie, as in every other man, had put up its head,\
      and kept him quietly ardent for months past. When a man has some\
      thing good to live for it is astonishing how sober he becomes;\
      and what Dartie had was really good\'97a three to one chance for an\
      autumn handicap, publicly assessed at twenty-five to one. The\
      old-fashioned heaven was a poor thing beside it, and his shirt\
      was on the daughter of Shirt-on-fire. But how much more than his\
      shirt depended on this granddaughter of Suspender! At that roving\
      age of forty-five, trying to Forsytes\'97and, though perhaps less\
      distinguishable from any other age, trying even to\
      Darties\'97Montague had fixed his current fancy on a dancer. It was\
      no mean passion, but without money, and a good deal of it, likely\
      to remain a love as airy as her skirts; and Dartie never had any\
      money, subsisting miserably on what he could beg or borrow from\
      Winifred\'97a woman of character, who kept him because he was the\
      father of her children, and from a lingering admiration for those\
      now-dying Wardour Street good looks which in their youth had\
      fascinated her. She, together with anyone else who would lend him\
      anything, and his losses at cards and on the turf (extraordinary\
      how some men make a good thing out of losses!) were his whole\
      means of subsistence; for James was now too old and nervous to\
      approach, and Soames too formidably adamant. It is not too much\
      to say that Dartie had been living on hope for months. He had\
      never been fond of money for itself, had always despised the\
      Forsytes with their investing habits, though careful to make such\
      use of them as he could. What he liked about money was what it\
      bought\'97personal sensation.\
\
      \'93No real sportsman cares for money,\'94 he would say, borrowing a\
      \'93pony\'94 if it was no use trying for a \'93monkey.\'94 There was\
      something delicious about Montague Dartie. He was, as George\
      Forsyte said, a \'93daisy.\'94\
\
      The morning of the Handicap dawned clear and bright, the last day\
      of September, and Dartie who had travelled to Newmarket the night\
      before, arrayed himself in spotless checks and walked to an\
      eminence to see his half of the filly take her final canter: If\
      she won he would be a cool three thou. in pocket\'97a poor enough\
      recompense for the sobriety and patience of these weeks of hope,\
      while they had been nursing her for this race. But he had not\
      been able to afford more. Should he \'93lay it off\'94 at the eight to\
      one to which she had advanced? This was his single thought while\
      the larks sang above him, and the grassy downs smelled sweet, and\
      the pretty filly passed, tossing her head and glowing like satin.\
\
      After all, if he lost it would not be he who paid, and to \'93lay it\
      off\'94 would reduce his winnings to some fifteen hundred\'97hardly\
      enough to purchase a dancer out and out. Even more potent was the\
      itch in the blood of all the Darties for a real flutter. And\
      turning to George he said: \'93She\'92s a clipper. She\'92ll win hands\
      down; I shall go the whole hog.\'94 George, who had laid off every\
      penny, and a few besides, and stood to win, however it came out,\
      grinned down on him from his bulky height, with the words: \'93So\
      ho, my wild one!\'94 for after a chequered apprenticeship weathered\
      with the money of a deeply complaining Roger, his Forsyte blood\
      was beginning to stand him in good stead in the profession of\
      owner.\
\
      There are moments of disillusionment in the lives of men from\
      which the sensitive recorder shrinks. Suffice it to say that the\
      good thing fell down. Sleeve-links finished in the ruck. Dartie\'92s\
      shirt was lost.\
\
      Between the passing of these things and the day when Soames\
      turned his face towards Green Street, what had not happened!\
\
      When a man with the constitution of Montague Dartie has exercised\
      self-control for months from religious motives, and remains\
      unrewarded, he does not curse God and die, he curses God and\
      lives, to the distress of his family.\
\
      Winifred\'97a plucky woman, if a little too fashionable\'97who had\
      borne the brunt of him for exactly twenty-one years, had never\
      really believed that he would do what he now did. Like so many\
      wives, she thought she knew the worst, but she had not yet known\
      him in his forty-fifth year, when he, like other men, felt that\
      it was now or never. Paying on the 2nd of October a visit of\
      inspection to her jewel case, she was horrified to observe that\
      her woman\'92s crown and glory was gone\'97the pearls which Montague\
      had given her in \'9286, when Benedict was born, and which James had\
      been compelled to pay for in the spring of \'9287, to save scandal.\
      She consulted her husband at once. He \'93pooh-poohed\'94 the matter.\
      They would turn up! Nor till she said sharply: \'93Very well, then,\
      Monty, I shall go down to Scotland Yard _myself_,\'94 did he consent\
      to take the matter in hand. Alas! that the steady and resolved\
      continuity of design necessary to the accomplishment of sweeping\
      operations should be liable to interruption by drink. That night\
      Dartie returned home without a care in the world or a particle of\
      reticence. Under normal conditions Winifred would merely have\
      locked her door and let him sleep it off, but torturing suspense\
      about her pearls had caused her to wait up for him. Taking a\
      small revolver from his pocket and holding on to the dining\
      table, he told her at once that he did not care a cursh whether\
      she lived s\'92long as she was quiet; but he himself wash tired\
      orsdquo; life. Winifred, holding onto the other side of the\
      dining table, answered:\
\
      \'93Don\'92t be a clown, Monty. Have you been to Scotland Yard?\'94\
\
      Placing the revolver against his chest, Dartie had pulled the\
      trigger several times. It was not loaded. Dropping it with an\
      imprecation, he had muttered: \'93For shake o\'92 the children,\'94 and\
      sank into a chair. Winifred, having picked up the revolver, gave\
      him some soda water. The liquor had a magical effect. Life had\
      illused him; Winifred had never \'93unshtood\'92m.\'94 If he hadn\'92t the\
      right to take the pearls he had given her himself, who had? That\
      Spanish filly had got\'92m. If Winifred had any \'92jection he w\'92d\
      cut\'97her\'97throat. What was the matter with that? (Probably the\
      first use of that celebrated phrase\'97so obscure are the origins of\
      even the most classical language!)\
\
      Winifred, who had learned self-containment in a hard school,\
      looked up at him, and said: \'93Spanish filly! Do you mean that girl\
      we saw dancing in the Pandemonium Ballet? Well, you are a thief\
      and a blackguard.\'94 It had been the last straw on a sorely loaded\
      consciousness; reaching up from his chair Dartie seized his\
      wife\'92s arm, and recalling the achievements of his boyhood,\
      twisted it. Winifred endured the agony with tears in her eyes,\
      but no murmur. Watching for a moment of weakness, she wrenched it\
      free; then placing the dining table between them, said between\
      her teeth: \'93You are the limit, Monty.\'94 (Undoubtedly the inception\
      of that phrase\'97so is English formed under the stress of\
      circumstances.) Leaving Dartie with foam on his dark moustache\
      she went upstairs, and, after locking her door and bathing her\
      arm in hot water, lay awake all night, thinking of her pearls\
      adorning the neck of another, and of the consideration her\
      husband had presumably received therefor.\
\
      The man of the world awoke with a sense of being lost to that\
      world, and a dim recollection of having been called a \'93limit.\'94 He\
      sat for half an hour in the dawn and the armchair where he had\
      slept\'97perhaps the unhappiest half-hour he had ever spent, for\
      even to a Dartie there is something tragic about an end. And he\
      knew that he had reached it. Never again would he sleep in his\
      dining-room and wake with the light filtering through those\
      curtains bought by Winifred at Nickens and Jarveys with the money\
      of James. Never again eat a devilled kidney at that rose-wood\
      table, after a roll in the sheets and a hot bath. He took his\
      note case from his dress coat pocket. Four hundred pounds, in\
      fives and tens\'97the remainder of the proceeds of his half of\
      Sleeve-links, sold last night, cash down, to George Forsyte, who,\
      having won over the race, had not conceived the sudden dislike to\
      the animal which he himself now felt. The ballet was going to\
      Buenos Aires the day after to-morrow, and he was going too. Full\
      value for the pearls had not yet been received; he was only at\
      the soup.\
\
      He stole upstairs. Not daring to have a bath, or shave (besides,\
      the water would be cold), he changed his clothes and packed\
      stealthily all he could. It was hard to leave so many shining\
      boots, but one must sacrifice something. Then, carrying a valise\
      in either hand, he stepped out onto the landing. The house was\
      very quiet\'97that house where he had begotten his four children. It\
      was a curious moment, this, outside the room of his wife, once\
      admired, if not perhaps loved, who had called him \'93the limit.\'94 He\
      steeled himself with that phrase, and tiptoed on; but the next\
      door was harder to pass. It was the room his daughters slept in.\
      Maud was at school, but Imogen would be lying there; and moisture\
      came into Dartie\'92s early morning eyes. She was the most like him\
      of the four, with her dark hair, and her luscious brown glance.\
      Just coming out, a pretty thing! He set down the two valises.\
      This almost formal abdication of fatherhood hurt him. The morning\
      light fell on a face which worked with real emotion. Nothing so\
      false as penitence moved him; but genuine paternal feeling, and\
      that melancholy of \'93never again.\'94 He moistened his lips; and\
      complete irresolution for a moment paralysed his legs in their\
      check trousers. It was hard\'97hard to be thus compelled to leave\
      his home! \'93D\'97-nit!\'94 he muttered, \'93I never thought it would come\
      to this.\'94 Noises above warned him that the maids were beginning\
      to get up. And grasping the two valises, he tiptoed on\
      downstairs. His cheeks were wet, and the knowledge of that was\
      comforting, as though it guaranteed the genuineness of his\
      sacrifice. He lingered a little in the rooms below, to pack all\
      the cigars he had, some papers, a crush hat, a silver cigarette\
      box, a Ruff\'92s Guide. Then, mixing himself a stiff whisky and\
      soda, and lighting a cigarette, he stood hesitating before a\
      photograph of his two girls, in a silver frame. It belonged to\
      Winifred. \'93Never mind,\'94 he thought; \'93she can get another taken,\
      and I can\'92t!\'94 He slipped it into the valise. Then, putting on his\
      hat and overcoat, he took two others, his best malacca cane, an\
      umbrella, and opened the front door. Closing it softly behind\
      him, he walked out, burdened as he had never been in all his\
      life, and made his way round the corner to wait there for an\
      early cab to come by.\
\
      Thus had passed Montague Dartie in the forty-fifth year of his\
      age from the house which he had called his own.\
\
      When Winifred came down, and realised that he was not in the\
      house, her first feeling was one of dull anger that he should\
      thus elude the reproaches she had carefully prepared in those\
      long wakeful hours. He had gone off to Newmarket or Brighton,\
      with that woman as likely as not. Disgusting! Forced to a\
      complete reticence before Imogen and the servants, and aware that\
      her father\'92s nerves would never stand the disclosure, she had\
      been unable to refrain from going to Timothy\'92s that afternoon,\
      and pouring out the story of the pearls to Aunts Juley and Hester\
      in utter confidence. It was only on the following morning that\
      she noticed the disappearance of that photograph. What did it\
      mean? Careful examination of her husband\'92s relics prompted the\
      thought that he had gone for good. As that conclusion hardened\
      she stood quite still in the middle of his dressing-room, with\
      all the drawers pulled out, to try and realise what she was\
      feeling. By no means easy! Though he was \'93the limit\'94 he was yet\
      her property, and for the life of her she could not but feel the\
      poorer. To be widowed yet not widowed at forty-two; with four\
      children; made conspicuous, an object of commiseration! Gone to\
      the arms of a Spanish Jade! Memories, feelings, which she had\
      thought quite dead, revived within her, painful, sullen,\
      tenacious. Mechanically she closed drawer after drawer, went to\
      her bed, lay on it, and buried her face in the pillows. She did\
      not cry. What was the use of that? When she got off her bed to go\
      down to lunch she felt as if only one thing could do her good,\
      and that was to have Val home. He\'97her eldest boy\'97who was to go to\
      Oxford next month at James\'92 expense, was at Littlehampton taking\
      his final gallops with his trainer for Smalls, as he would have\
      phrased it following his father\'92s diction. She caused a telegram\
      to be sent to him.\
\
      \'93I must see about his clothes,\'94 she said to Imogen; \'93I can\'92t have\
      him going up to Oxford all anyhow. Those boys are so particular.\'94\
\
      \'93Val\'92s got heaps of things,\'94 Imogen answered.\
\
      \'93I know; but they want overhauling. I hope he\'92ll come.\'94\
\
      \'93He\'92ll come like a shot, Mother. But he\'92ll probably skew his\
      Exam.\'94\
\
      \'93I can\'92t help that,\'94 said Winifred. \'93I want him.\'94\
\
      With an innocent shrewd look at her mother\'92s face, Imogen kept\
      silence. It was father, of course! Val did come \'93like a shot\'94 at\
      six o\'92clock.\
\
      Imagine a cross between a pickle and a Forsyte and you have young\
      Publius Valerius Dartie. A youth so named could hardly turn out\
      otherwise. When he was born, Winifred, in the heyday of spirits,\
      and the craving for distinction, had determined that her children\
      should have names such as no others had ever had. (It was a\
      mercy\'97she felt now\'97that she had just not named Imogen Thisbe.)\
      But it was to George Forsyte, always a wag, that Val\'92s\
      christening was due. It so happened that Dartie, dining with him\
      a week after the birth of his son and heir, had mentioned this\
      aspiration of Winifred\'92s.\
\
      \'93Call him Cato,\'94 said George, \'93it\'92ll be damned piquant!\'94 He had\
      just won a tenner on a horse of that name.\
\
      \'93Cato!\'94 Dartie had replied\'97they were a little \'91on\'92 as the phrase\
      was even in those days\'97\'93it\'92s not a Christian name.\'94\
\
      \'93Halo you!\'94 George called to a waiter in knee breeches. \'93Bring me\
      the _Encyc\'92pedia Brit_. from the Library, letter C.\'94\
\
      The waiter brought it.\
\
      \'93Here you are!\'94 said George, pointing with his cigar: \'93Cato\
      Publius Valerius by Virgil out of Lydia. That\'92s what you want.\
      Publius Valerius is Christian enough.\'94\
\
      Dartie, on arriving home, had informed Winifred. She had been\
      charmed. It was so \'93chic.\'94 And Publius Valerius became the baby\'92s\
      name, though it afterwards transpired that they had got hold of\
      the inferior Cato. In 1890, however, when little Publius was\
      nearly ten, the word \'93chic\'94 went out of fashion, and sobriety\
      came in; Winifred began to have doubts. They were confirmed by\
      little Publius himself who returned from his first term at school\
      complaining that life was a burden to him\'97they called him Pubby.\
      Winifred\'97a woman of real decision\'97promptly changed his school and\
      his name to Val, the Publius being dropped even as an initial.\
\
      At nineteen he was a limber, freckled youth with a wide mouth,\
      light eyes, long dark lashes; a rather charming smile,\
      considerable knowledge of what he should not know, and no\
      experience of what he ought to do. Few boys had more narrowly\
      escaped being expelled\'97the engaging rascal. After kissing his\
      mother and pinching Imogen, he ran upstairs three at a time, and\
      came down four, dressed for dinner. He was awfully sorry, but his\
      \'93trainer,\'94 who had come up too, had asked him to dine at the\
      Oxford and Cambridge; it wouldn\'92t do to miss\'97the old chap would\
      be hurt. Winifred let him go with an unhappy pride. She had\
      wanted him at home, but it was very nice to know that his tutor\
      was so fond of him. He went out with a wink at Imogen, saying: \'93I\
      say, Mother, could I have two plover\'92s eggs when I come\
      in?\'97cook\'92s got some. They top up so jolly well. Oh! and look\
      here\'97have you any money?\'97I had to borrow a fiver from old\
      Snobby.\'94\
\
      Winifred, looking at him with fond shrewdness, answered:\
\
      \'93My dear, you _are_ naughty about money. But you shouldn\'92t pay\
      him to-night, anyway; you\'92re his guest. How nice and slim he\
      looked in his white waistcoat, and his dark thick lashes!\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, but we may go to the theatre, you see, Mother; and I think I\
      ought to stand the tickets; he\'92s always hard up, you know.\'94\
\
      Winifred produced a five-pound note, saying:\
\
      \'93Well, perhaps you\'92d better pay him, but you mustn\'92t stand the\
      tickets too.\'94\
\
      Val pocketed the fiver.\
\
      \'93If I do, I can\'92t,\'94 he said. \'93Good-night, Mum!\'94\
\
      He went out with his head up and his hat cocked joyously,\
      sniffing the air of Piccadilly like a young hound loosed into\
      covert. Jolly good biz! After that mouldy old slow hole down\
      there!\
\
      He found his \'93tutor,\'94 not indeed at the Oxford and Cambridge, but\
      at the Goat\'92s Club. This \'93tutor\'94 was a year older than himself, a\
      good-looking youth, with fine brown eyes, and smooth dark hair, a\
      small mouth, an oval face, languid, immaculate, cool to a degree,\
      one of those young men who without effort establish moral\
      ascendancy over their companions. He had missed being expelled\
      from school a year before Val, had spent that year at Oxford, and\
      Val could almost see a halo round his head. His name was Crum,\
      and no one could get through money quicker. It seemed to be his\
      only aim in life\'97dazzling to young Val, in whom, however, the\
      Forsyte would stand apart, now and then, wondering where the\
      value for that money was.\
\
      They dined quietly, in style and taste; left the Club smoking\
      cigars, with just two bottles inside them, and dropped into\
      stalls at the Liberty. For Val the sound of comic songs, the\
      sight of lovely legs were fogged and interrupted by haunting\
      fears that he would never equal Crum\'92s quiet dandyism. His\
      idealism was roused; and when that is so, one is never quite at\
      ease. Surely he had too wide a mouth, not the best cut of\
      waistcoat, no braid on his trousers, and his lavender gloves had\
      no thin black stitchings down the back. Besides, he laughed too\
      much\'97Crum never laughed, he only smiled, with his regular dark\
      brows raised a little so that they formed a gable over his just\
      drooped lids. No! he would never be Crum\'92s equal. All the same it\
      was a jolly good show, and Cynthia Dark simply ripping. Between\
      the acts Crum regaled him with particulars of Cynthia\'92s private\
      life, and the awful knowledge became Val\'92s that, if he liked,\
      Crum could go behind. He simply longed to say: \'93I say, take me!\'94\
      but dared not, because of his deficiencies; and this made the\
      last act or two almost miserable. On coming out Crum said: \'93It\'92s\
      half an hour before they close; let\'92s go on to the Pandemonium.\'94\
      They took a hansom to travel the hundred yards, and seats costing\
      seven-and-six apiece because they were going to stand, and walked\
      into the Promenade. It was in these little things, this utter\
      negligence of money that Crum had such engaging polish. The\
      ballet was on its last legs and night, and the traffic of the\
      Promenade was suffering for the moment. Men and women were\
      crowded in three rows against the barrier. The whirl and dazzle\
      on the stage, the half dark, the mingled tobacco fumes and\
      women\'92s scent, all that curious lure to promiscuity which belongs\
      to Promenades, began to free young Val from his idealism. He\
      looked admiringly in a young woman\'92s face, saw she was not young,\
      and quickly looked away. Shades of Cynthia Dark! The young\
      woman\'92s arm touched his unconsciously; there was a scent of musk\
      and mignonette. Val looked round the corner of his lashes.\
      Perhaps she _was_ young, after all. Her foot trod on his; she\
      begged his pardon. He said:\
\
      \'93Not at all; jolly good ballet, isn\'92t it?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, I\'92m tired of it; aren\'92t you?\'94\
\
      Young Val smiled\'97his wide, rather charming smile. Beyond that he\
      did not go\'97not yet convinced. The Forsyte in him stood out for\
      greater certainty. And on the stage the ballet whirled its\
      kaleidoscope of snow-white, salmon-pink, and emerald-green and\
      violet and seemed suddenly to freeze into a stilly spangled\
      pyramid. Applause broke out, and it was over! Maroon curtains had\
      cut it off. The semi-circle of men and women round the barrier\
      broke up, the young woman\'92s arm pressed his. A little way off\
      disturbance seemed centring round a man with a pink carnation;\
      Val stole another glance at the young woman, who was looking\
      towards it. Three men, unsteady, emerged, walking arm in arm. The\
      one in the centre wore the pink carnation, a white waistcoat, a\
      dark moustache; he reeled a little as he walked. Crum\'92s voice\
      said slow and level: \'93Look at that bounder, he\'92s screwed!\'94 Val\
      turned to look. The \'93bounder\'94 had disengaged his arm, and was\
      pointing straight at them. Crum\'92s voice, level as ever, said:\
\
      \'93He seems to know you!\'94 The \'93bounder\'94 spoke:\
\
      \'93H\'92llo!\'94 he said. \'93You f\'92llows, look! There\'92s my young rascal of\
      a son!\'94\
\
      Val saw. It was his father! He could have sunk into the crimson\
      carpet. It was not the meeting in this place, not even that his\
      father was \'93screwed\'94. it was Crum\'92s word \'93bounder,\'94 which, as by\
      heavenly revelation, he perceived at that moment to be true. Yes,\
      his father looked a bounder with his dark good looks, and his\
      pink carnation, and his square, self-assertive walk. And without\
      a word he ducked behind the young woman and slipped out of the\
      Promenade. He heard the word, \'93Val!\'94 behind him, and ran down\
      deep-carpeted steps past the \'93chuckersout,\'94 into the Square.\
\
      To be ashamed of his own father is perhaps the bitterest\
      experience a young man can go through. It seemed to Val, hurrying\
      away, that his career had ended before it had begun. How could he\
      go up to Oxford now amongst all those chaps, those splendid\
      friends of Crum\'92s, who would know that his father was a\
      \'93bounder\'94. And suddenly he hated Crum. Who the devil was Crum, to\
      say that? If Crum had been beside him at that moment, he would\
      certainly have been jostled off the pavement. His own father\'97his\
      own! A choke came up in his throat, and he dashed his hands down\
      deep into his overcoat pockets. Damn Crum! He conceived the wild\
      idea of running back and fending his father, taking him by the\
      arm and walking about with him in front of Crum; but gave it up\
      at once and pursued his way down Piccadilly. A young woman\
      planted herself before him. \'93Not so angry, darling!\'94 He shied,\
      dodged her, and suddenly became quite cool. If Crum ever said a\
      word, he would jolly well punch his head, and there would be an\
      end of it. He walked a hundred yards or more, contented with that\
      thought, then lost its comfort utterly. It wasn\'92t simple like\
      that! He remembered how, at school, when some parent came down\
      who did not pass the standard, it just clung to the fellow\
      afterwards. It was one of those things nothing could remove. Why\
      had his mother married his father, if he was a \'93bounder\'94. It was\
      bitterly unfair\'97jolly low-down on a fellow to give him a\
      \'93bounder\'94 for father. The worst of it was that now Crum had\
      spoken the word, he realised that he had long known\
      subconsciously that his father was not \'93the clean potato.\'94 It was\
      the beastliest thing that had ever happened to him\'97beastliest\
      thing that had ever happened to any fellow! And, down-hearted as\
      he had never yet been, he came to Green Street, and let himself\
      in with a smuggled latch-key. In the dining-room his plover\'92s\
      eggs were set invitingly, with some cut bread and butter, and a\
      little whisky at the bottom of a decanter\'97just enough, as\
      Winifred had thought, for him to feel himself a man. It made him\
      sick to look at them, and he went upstairs.\
\
      Winifred heard him pass, and thought: \'93The dear boy\'92s in. Thank\
      goodness! If he takes after his father I don\'92t know what I shall\
      do! But he won\'92t he\'92s like me. Dear Val!\'94\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER III SOAMES PREPARES TO TAKE STEPS\
\
\
      When Soames entered his sister\'92s little Louis Quinze\
      drawing-room, with its small balcony, always flowered with\
      hanging geraniums in the summer, and now with pots of Lilium\
      Auratum, he was struck by the immutability of human affairs. It\
      looked just the same as on his first visit to the newly married\
      Darties twenty-one years ago. He had chosen the furniture\
      himself, and so completely that no subsequent purchase had ever\
      been able to change the room\'92s atmosphere. Yes, he had founded\
      his sister well, and she had wanted it. Indeed, it said a great\
      deal for Winifred that after all this time with Dartie she\
      remained well-founded. From the first Soames had nosed out\
      Dartie\'92s nature from underneath the plausibility, _savoir faire_,\
      and good looks which had dazzled Winifred, her mother, and even\
      James, to the extent of permitting the fellow to marry his\
      daughter without bringing anything but shares of no value into\
      settlement.\
\
      Winifred, whom he noticed next to the furniture, was sitting at\
      her Buhl bureau with a letter in her hand. She rose and came\
      towards him. Tall as himself, strong in the cheekbones, well\
      tailored, something in her face disturbed Soames. She crumpled\
      the letter in her hand, but seemed to change her mind and held it\
      out to him. He was her lawyer as well as her brother.\
\
      Soames read, on Iseeum Club paper, these words:\
\
      \'91You will not get chance to insult in my own again. I am leaving\
      country to-morrow. It\'92s played out. I\'92m tired of being insulted\
      by you. You\'92ve brought on yourself. No self-respecting man can\
      stand it. I shall not ask you for anything again. Good-bye. I\
      took the photograph of the two girls. Give them my love. I don\'92t\
      care what your family say. It\'92s all their doing. I\'92m going to\
      live new life.\
\
      \'91M.D.\'92\
\
      This after-dinner note had a splotch on it not yet quite dry. He\
      looked at Winifred\'97the splotch had clearly come from her; and he\
      checked the words: \'93Good riddance!\'94 Then it occurred to him that\
      with this letter she was entering that very state which he\
      himself so earnestly desired to quit\'97the state of a Forsyte who\
      was not divorced.\
\
      Winifred had turned away, and was taking a long sniff from a\
      little gold-topped bottle. A dull commiseration, together with a\
      vague sense of injury, crept about Soames\'92 heart. He had come to\
      her to talk of his own position, and get sympathy, and here was\
      she in the same position, wanting of course to talk of it, and\
      get sympathy from him. It was always like that! Nobody ever\
      seemed to think that he had troubles and interests of his own. He\
      folded up the letter with the splotch inside, and said:\
\
      \'93What\'92s it all about, now?\'94\
\
      Winifred recited the story of the pearls calmly.\
\
      \'93Do you think he\'92s really gone, Soames? You see the state he was\
      in when he wrote that.\'94\
\
      Soames who, when he desired a thing, placated Providence by\
      pretending that he did not think it likely to happen, answered:\
\
      \'93I shouldn\'92t think so. I might find out at his Club.\'94\
\
      \'93If George is there,\'94 said Winifred, \'93he would know.\'94\
\
      \'93George?\'94 said Soames; \'93I saw him at his father\'92s funeral.\'94\
\
      \'93Then he\'92s sure to be there.\'94\
\
      Soames, whose good sense applauded his sister\'92s acumen, said\
      grudgingly: \'93Well, I\'92ll go round. Have you said anything in Park\
      Lane?\'94\
\
      \'93I\'92ve told Emily,\'94 returned Winifred, who retained that \'93chic\'94\
      way of describing her mother. \'93Father would have a fit.\'94\
\
      Indeed, anything untoward was now sedulously kept from James.\
      With another look round at the furniture, as if to gauge his\
      sister\'92s exact position, Soames went out towards Piccadilly. The\
      evening was drawing in\'97a touch of chill in the October haze. He\
      walked quickly, with his close and concentrated air. He must get\
      through, for he wished to dine in Soho. On hearing from the hall\
      porter at the Iseeum that Mr. Dartie had not been in to-day, he\
      looked at the trusty fellow and decided only to ask if Mr. George\
      Forsyte was in the Club. He was. Soames, who always looked\
      askance at his cousin George, as one inclined to jest at his\
      expense, followed the pageboy, slightly reassured by the thought\
      that George had just lost his father. He must have come in for\
      about thirty thousand, besides what he had under that settlement\
      of Roger\'92s, which had avoided death duty. He found George in a\
      bow-window, staring out across a half-eaten plate of muffins. His\
      tall, bulky, black-clothed figure loomed almost threatening,\
      though preserving still the supernatural neatness of the racing\
      man. With a faint grin on his fleshy face, he said:\
\
      \'93Hallo, Soames! Have a muffin?\'94\
\
      \'93No, thanks,\'94 murmured Soames; and, nursing his hat, with the\
      desire to say something suitable and sympathetic, added:\
\
      \'93How\'92s your mother?\'94\
\
      \'93Thanks,\'94 said George; \'93so-so. Haven\'92t seen you for ages. You\
      never go racing. How\'92s the City?\'94\
\
      Soames, scenting the approach of a jest, closed up, and answered:\
\
      \'93I wanted to ask you about Dartie. I hear he\'92s....\'94\
\
      \'93Flitted, made a bolt to Buenos Aires with the fair Lola. Good\
      for Winifred and the little Darties. He\'92s a treat.\'94\
\
      Soames nodded. Naturally inimical as these cousins were, Dartie\
      made them kin.\
\
      \'93Uncle James\'92ll sleep in his bed now,\'94 resumed George; \'93I suppose\
      he\'92s had a lot off you, too.\'94\
\
      Soames smiled.\
\
      \'93Ah! You saw him further,\'94 said George amicably. \'93He\'92s a real\
      rouser. Young Val will want a bit of looking after. I was always\
      sorry for Winifred. She\'92s a plucky woman.\'94\
\
      Again Soames nodded. \'93I must be getting back to her,\'94 he said;\
      \'93she just wanted to know for certain. We may have to take steps.\
      I suppose there\'92s no mistake?\'94\
\
      \'93It\'92s quite O.K.,\'94 said George\'97it was he who invented so many of\
      those quaint sayings which have been assigned to other sources.\
      \'93He was drunk as a lord last night; but he went off all right\
      this morning. His ship\'92s the _Tuscarora;_\'94 and, fishing out a\
      card, he read mockingly:\
\
      \'93\'91Mr. Montague Dartie, Poste Restante, Buenos Aires.\'92 I should\
      hurry up with the steps, if I were you. He fairly fed me up last\
      night.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Soames; \'93but it\'92s not always easy.\'94 Then, conscious\
      from George\'92s eyes that he had roused reminiscence of his own\
      affair, he got up, and held out his hand. George rose too.\
\
      \'93Remember me to Winifred.... You\'92ll enter her for the Divorce\
      Stakes straight off if you ask me.\'94\
\
      Soames took a sidelong look back at him from the doorway. George\
      had seated himself again and was staring before him; he looked\
      big and lonely in those black clothes. Soames had never known him\
      so subdued. \'93I suppose he feels it in a way,\'94 he thought. \'93They\
      must have about fifty thousand each, all told. They ought to keep\
      the estate together. If there\'92s a war, house property will go\
      down. Uncle Roger was a good judge, though.\'94 And the face of\
      Annette rose before him in the darkening street; her brown hair\
      and her blue eyes with their dark lashes, her fresh lips and\
      cheeks, dewy and blooming in spite of London, her perfect French\
      figure. \'93Take steps!\'94 he thought. Re-entering Winifred\'92s house he\
      encountered Val, and they went in together. An idea had occurred\
      to Soames. His cousin Jolyon was Irene\'92s trustee, the first step\
      would be to go down and see him at Robin Hill. Robin Hill! The\
      odd\'97the very odd feeling those words brought back! Robin Hill\'97the\
      house Bosinney had built for him and Irene\'97the house they had\
      never lived in\'97the fatal house! And Jolyon lived there now! H\'92m!\
      And suddenly he thought: \'93They say he\'92s got a boy at Oxford! Why\
      not take young Val down and introduce them! It\'92s an excuse! Less\
      bald\'97very much less bald!\'94 So, as they went upstairs, he said to\
      Val:\
\
      \'93You\'92ve got a cousin at Oxford; you\'92ve never met him. I should\
      like to take you down with me to-morrow to where he lives and\
      introduce you. You\'92ll find it useful.\'94\
\
      Val, receiving the idea with but moderate transports, Soames\
      clinched it.\
\
      \'93I\'92ll call for you after lunch. It\'92s in the country\'97not far;\
      you\'92ll enjoy it.\'94\
\
      On the threshold of the drawing-room he recalled with an effort\
      that the steps he contemplated concerned Winifred at the moment,\
      not himself.\
\
      Winifred was still sitting at her Buhl bureau.\
\
      \'93It\'92s quite true,\'94 he said; \'93he\'92s gone to Buenos Aires, started\
      this morning\'97we\'92d better have him shadowed when he lands. I\'92ll\
      cable at once. Otherwise we may have a lot of expense. The sooner\
      these things are done the better. I\'92m always regretting that I\
      didn\'92t...\'94 he stopped, and looked sidelong at the silent\
      Winifred. \'93By the way,\'94 he went on, \'93can you prove cruelty?\'94\
\
      Winifred said in a dull voice:\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know. What is cruelty?\'94\
\
      \'93Well, has he struck you, or anything?\'94\
\
      Winifred shook herself, and her jaw grew square.\
\
      \'93He twisted my arm. Or would pointing a pistol count? Or being\
      too drunk to undress himself, or\'97No\'97I can\'92t bring in the\
      children.\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Soames; \'93no! I wonder! Of course, there\'92s legal\
      separation\'97we can get that. But separation! Um!\'94\
\
      \'93What does it mean?\'94 asked Winifred desolately.\
\
      \'93That he can\'92t touch you, or you him; you\'92re both of you married\
      and unmarried.\'94 And again he grunted. What was it, in fact, but\
      his own accursed position, legalised! No, he would not put her\
      into that!\
\
      \'93It must be divorce,\'94 he said decisively; \'93failing cruelty,\
      there\'92s desertion. There\'92s a way of shortening the two years,\
      now. We get the Court to give us restitution of conjugal rights.\
      Then if he doesn\'92t obey, we can bring a suit for divorce in six\
      months\'92 time. Of course you don\'92t want him back. But they won\'92t\
      know that. Still, there\'92s the risk that he might come. I\'92d rather\
      try cruelty.\'94\
\
      Winifred shook her head. \'93It\'92s so beastly.\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 Soames murmured, \'93perhaps there isn\'92t much risk so long\
      as he\'92s infatuated and got money. Don\'92t say anything to anybody,\
      and don\'92t pay any of his debts.\'94\
\
      Winifred sighed. In spite of all she had been through, the sense\
      of loss was heavy on her. And this idea of not paying his debts\
      any more brought it home to her as nothing else yet had. Some\
      richness seemed to have gone out of life. Without her husband,\
      without her pearls, without that intimate sense that she made a\
      brave show above the domestic whirlpool, she would now have to\
      face the world. She felt bereaved indeed.\
\
      And into the chilly kiss he placed on her forehead, Soames put\
      more than his usual warmth.\
\
      \'93I have to go down to Robin Hill to-morrow,\'94 he said, \'93to see\
      young Jolyon on business. He\'92s got a boy at Oxford. I\'92d like to\
      take Val with me and introduce him. Come down to \'91The Shelter\'92\
      for the week-end and bring the children. Oh! by the way, no, that\
      won\'92t do; I\'92ve got some other people coming.\'94 So saying, he left\
      her and turned towards Soho.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER IV SOHO\
\
\
      Of all quarters in the queer adventurous amalgam called London,\
      Soho is perhaps least suited to the Forsyte spirit. \'93So-ho, my\
      wild one!\'94 George would have said if he had seen his cousin going\
      there. Untidy, full of Greeks, Ishmaelites, cats, Italians,\
      tomatoes, restaurants, organs, coloured stuffs, queer names,\
      people looking out of upper windows, it dwells remote from the\
      British Body Politic. Yet has it haphazard proprietary instincts\
      of its own, and a certain possessive prosperity which keeps its\
      rents up when those of other quarters go down. For long years\
      Soames\'92 acquaintanceship with Soho had been confined to its\
      Western bastion, Wardour Street. Many bargains had he picked up\
      there. Even during those seven years at Brighton after Bosinney\'92s\
      death and Irene\'92s flight, he had bought treasures there\
      sometimes, though he had no place to put them; for when the\
      conviction that his wife had gone for good at last became firm\
      within him, he had caused a board to be put up in Montpellier\
      Square:\
\
      FOR SALE\
      THE LEASE OF THIS DESIRABLE RESIDENCE\
      Enquire of Messrs. Lesson and Tukes, Court Street, Belgravia.\
\
      It had sold within a week\'97that desirable residence, in the shadow\
      of whose perfection a man and a woman had eaten their hearts out.\
\
      Of a misty January evening, just before the board was taken down,\
      Soames had gone there once more, and stood against the Square\
      railings, looking at its unlighted windows, chewing the cud of\
      possessive memories which had turned so bitter in the mouth. Why\
      had she never loved him? Why? She had been given all she had\
      wanted, and in return had given him, for three long years, all he\
      had wanted\'97except, indeed, her heart. He had uttered a little\
      involuntary groan, and a passing policeman had glanced\
      suspiciously at him who no longer possessed the right to enter\
      that green door with the carved brass knocker beneath the board\
      \'93For Sale!\'94 A choking sensation had attacked his throat, and he\
      had hurried away into the mist. That evening he had gone to\
      Brighton to live....\
\
      Approaching Malta Street, Soho, and the Restaurant Bretagne,\
      where Annette would be drooping her pretty shoulders over her\
      accounts, Soames thought with wonder of those seven years at\
      Brighton. How had he managed to go on so long in that town devoid\
      of the scent of sweetpeas, where he had not even space to put his\
      treasures? True, those had been years with no time at all for\
      looking at them\'97years of almost passionate money-making, during\
      which Forsyte, Bustard and Forsyte had become solicitors to more\
      limited Companies than they could properly attend to. Up to the\
      City of a morning in a Pullman car, down from the City of an\
      evening in a Pullman car. Law papers again after dinner, then the\
      sleep of the tired, and up again next morning. Saturday to Monday\
      was spent at his Club in town\'97curious reversal of customary\
      procedure, based on the deep and careful instinct that while\
      working so hard he needed sea air to and from the station twice a\
      day, and while resting must indulge his domestic affections. The\
      Sunday visit to his family in Park Lane, to Timothy\'92s, and to\
      Green Street; the occasional visits elsewhere had seemed to him\
      as necessary to health as sea air on weekdays. Even since his\
      migration to Mapledurham he had maintained those habits until\'97he\
      had known Annette.\
\
      Whether Annette had produced the revolution in his outlook, or\
      that outlook had produced Annette, he knew no more than we know\
      where a circle begins. It was intricate and deeply involved with\
      the growing consciousness that property without anyone to leave\
      it to is the negation of true Forsyteism. To have an heir, some\
      continuance of self, who would begin where he left off\'97ensure, in\
      fact, that he would not leave off\'97had quite obsessed him for the\
      last year and more. After buying a bit of Wedgwood one evening in\
      April, he had dropped into Malta Street to look at a house of his\
      father\'92s which had been turned into a restaurant\'97a risky\
      proceeding, and one not quite in accordance with the terms of the\
      lease. He had stared for a little at the outside painted a good\
      cream colour, with two peacock-blue tubs containing little\
      bay-trees in a recessed doorway\'97and at the words \'93Restaurant\
      Bretagne\'94 above them in gold letters, rather favourably\
      impressed. Entering, he had noticed that several people were\
      already seated at little round green tables with little pots of\
      fresh flowers on them and Brittany-ware plates, and had asked of\
      a trim waitress to see the proprietor. They had shown him into a\
      back room, where a girl was sitting at a simple bureau covered\
      with papers, and a small round, table was laid for two. The\
      impression of cleanliness, order, and good taste was confirmed\
      when the girl got up, saying, \'93You wish to see _Maman,\
      Monsieur?_\'94 in a broken accent.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 Soames had answered, \'93I represent your landlord; in fact,\
      I\'92m his son.\'94\
\
      \'93Won\'92t you sit down, sir, please? Tell _Maman_ to come to this\
      gentleman.\'94\
\
      He was pleased that the girl seemed impressed, because it showed\
      business instinct; and suddenly he noticed that she was\
      remarkably pretty\'97so remarkably pretty that his eyes found a\
      difficulty in leaving her face. When she moved to put a chair for\
      him, she swayed in a curious subtle way, as if she had been put\
      together by someone with a special secret skill; and her face and\
      neck, which was a little bared, looked as fresh as if they had\
      been sprayed with dew. Probably at this moment Soames decided\
      that the lease had not been violated; though to himself and his\
      father he based the decision on the efficiency of those illicit\
      adaptations in the building, on the signs of prosperity, and the\
      obvious business capacity of Madame Lamotte. He did not, however,\
      neglect to leave certain matters to future consideration, which\
      had necessitated further visits, so that the little back room had\
      become quite accustomed to his spare, not unsolid, but\
      unobtrusive figure, and his pale, chinny face with clipped\
      moustache and dark hair not yet grizzling at the sides.\
\
      \'93_Un Monsieur tr\'e8s distingu\'e9_,\'94 Madame Lamotte found him; and\
      presently, \'93_Tr\'e8s amical, tr\'e8s gentil_,\'94 watching his eyes upon\
      her daughter.\
\
      She was one of those generously built, fine-faced, dark-haired\
      Frenchwomen, whose every action and tone of voice inspire perfect\
      confidence in the thoroughness of their domestic tastes, their\
      knowledge of cooking, and the careful increase of their bank\
      balances.\
\
      After those visits to the Restaurant Bretagne began, other visits\
      ceased\'97without, indeed, any definite decision, for Soames, like\
      all Forsytes, and the great majority of their countrymen, was a\
      born empiricist. But it was this change in his mode of life which\
      had gradually made him so definitely conscious that he desired to\
      alter his condition from that of the unmarried married man to\
      that of the married man remarried.\
\
      Turning into Malta Street on this evening of early October, 1899,\
      he bought a paper to see if there were any after-development of\
      the Dreyfus case\'97a question which he had always found useful in\
      making closer acquaintanceship with Madame Lamotte and her\
      daughter, who were Catholic and anti-Dreyfusard.\
\
      Scanning those columns, Soames found nothing French, but noticed\
      a general fall on the Stock Exchange and an ominous leader about\
      the Transvaal. He entered, thinking: \'93War\'92s a certainty. I shall\
      sell my consols.\'94 Not that he had many, personally, the rate of\
      interest was too wretched; but he should advise his\
      Companies\'97consols would assuredly go down. A look, as he passed\
      the doorways of the restaurant, assured him that business was\
      good as ever, and this, which in April would have pleased him,\
      now gave him a certain uneasiness. If the steps which he had to\
      take ended in his marrying Annette, he would rather see her\
      mother safely back in France, a move to which the prosperity of\
      the Restaurant Bretagne might become an obstacle. He would have\
      to buy them out, of course, for French people only came to\
      England to make money; and it would mean a higher price. And then\
      that peculiar sweet sensation at the back of his throat, and a\
      slight thumping about the heart, which he always experienced at\
      the door of the little room, prevented his thinking how much it\
      would cost.\
\
      Going in, he was conscious of an abundant black skirt vanishing\
      through the door into the restaurant, and of Annette with her\
      hands up to her hair. It was the attitude in which of all others\
      he admired her\'97so beautifully straight and rounded and supple.\
      And he said:\
\
      \'93I just came in to talk to your mother about pulling down that\
      partition. No, don\'92t call her.\'94\
\
      \'93_Monsieur_ will have supper with us? It will be ready in ten\
      minutes.\'94 Soames, who still held her hand, was overcome by an\
      impulse which surprised him.\
\
      \'93You look so pretty to-night,\'94 he said, \'93so very pretty. Do you\
      know how pretty you look, Annette?\'94\
\
      Annette withdrew her hand, and blushed. \'93Monsieur is very good.\'94\
\
      \'93Not a bit good,\'94 said Soames, and sat down gloomily.\
\
      Annette made a little expressive gesture with her hands; a smile\
      was crinkling her red lips untouched by salve.\
\
      And, looking at those lips, Soames said:\
\
      \'93Are you happy over here, or do you want to go back to France?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, I like London. Paris, of course. But London is better than\
      Orleans, and the English country is so beautiful. I have been to\
      Richmond last Sunday.\'94\
\
      Soames went through a moment of calculating struggle.\
      Mapledurham! Dared he? After all, dared he go so far as that, and\
      show her what there was to look forward to! Still! Down there one\
      could say things. In this room it was impossible.\
\
      \'93I want you and your mother,\'94 he said suddenly, \'93to come for the\
      afternoon next Sunday. My house is on the river, it\'92s not too\
      late in this weather; and I can show you some good pictures. What\
      do you say?\'94\
\
      Annette clasped her hands.\
\
      \'93It will be lovelee. The river is so beautiful\'94\
\
      \'93That\'92s understood, then. I\'92ll ask Madame.\'94\
\
      He need say no more to her this evening, and risk giving himself\
      away. But had he not already said too much? Did one ask\
      restaurant proprietors with pretty daughters down to one\'92s\
      country house without design? Madame Lamotte would see, if\
      Annette didn\'92t. Well! there was not much that Madame did not see.\
      Besides, this was the second time he had stayed to supper with\
      them; he owed them hospitality.\
\
      Walking home towards Park Lane\'97for he was staying at his\
      father\'92s\'97with the impression of Annette\'92s soft clever hand within\
      his own, his thoughts were pleasant, slightly sensual, rather\
      puzzled. Take steps! What steps? How? Dirty linen washed in\
      public? Pah! With his reputation for sagacity, for\
      far-sightedness and the clever extrication of others, he, who\
      stood for proprietary interests, to become the plaything of that\
      Law of which he was a pillar! There was something revolting in\
      the thought! Winifred\'92s affair was bad enough! To have a double\
      dose of publicity in the family! Would not a liaison be better\
      than that\'97a liaison, and a son he could adopt? But dark, solid,\
      watchful, Madame Lamotte blocked the avenue of that vision. No!\
      that would not work. It was not as if Annette could have a real\
      passion for him; one could not expect that at his age. If her\
      mother wished, if the worldly advantage were manifestly\
      great\'97perhaps! If not, refusal would be certain. Besides, he\
      thought: \'93I\'92m not a villain. I don\'92t want to hurt her; and I\
      don\'92t want anything underhand. But I do want her, and I want a\
      son! There\'92s nothing for it but divorce\'97somehow\'97anyhow\'97divorce!\'94\
      Under the shadow of the plane-trees, in the lamplight, he passed\
      slowly along the railings of the Green Park. Mist clung there\
      among the bluish tree shapes, beyond range of the lamps. How many\
      hundred times he had walked past those trees from his father\'92s\
      house in Park Lane, when he was quite a young man; or from his\
      own house in Montpellier Square in those four years of married\
      life! And, to-night, making up his mind to free himself if he\
      could of that long useless marriage tie, he took a fancy to walk\
      on, in at Hyde Park Corner, out at Knightsbridge Gate, just as he\
      used to when going home to Irene in the old days. What could she\
      be like now?\'97how had she passed the years since he last saw her,\
      twelve years in all, seven already since Uncle Jolyon left her\
      that money? Was she still beautiful? Would he know her if he saw\
      her? \'93I\'92ve not changed much,\'94 he thought; \'93I expect she has. She\
      made me suffer.\'94 He remembered suddenly one night, the first on\
      which he went out to dinner alone\'97an old Malburian dinner\'97the\
      first year of their marriage. With what eagerness he had hurried\
      back; and, entering softly as a cat, had heard her playing.\
      Opening the drawing-room door noiselessly, he had stood watching\
      the expression on her face, different from any he knew, so much\
      more open, so confiding, as though to her music she was giving a\
      heart he had never seen. And he remembered how she stopped and\
      looked round, how her face changed back to that which he did\
      know, and what an icy shiver had gone through him, for all that\
      the next moment he was fondling her shoulders. Yes, she had made\
      him suffer! Divorce! It seemed ridiculous, after all these years\
      of utter separation! But it would have to be. No other way! \'93The\
      question,\'94 he thought with sudden realism, \'93is\'97which of us? She\
      or me? She deserted me. She ought to pay for it. There\'92ll be\
      someone, I suppose.\'94 Involuntarily he uttered a little snarling\
      sound, and, turning, made his way back to Park Lane.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER V JAMES SEES VISIONS\
\
\
      The butler himself opened the door, and closing it softly,\
      detained Soames on the inner mat.\
\
      \'93The master\'92s poorly, sir,\'94 he murmured. \'93He wouldn\'92t go to bed\
      till you came in. He\'92s still in the diningroom.\'94\
\
      Soames responded in the hushed tone to which the house was now\
      accustomed.\
\
      \'93What\'92s the matter with him, Warmson?\'94\
\
      \'93Nervous, sir, I think. Might be the funeral; might be Mrs.\
      Dartie\'92s comin\'92 round this afternoon. I think he overheard\
      something. I\'92ve took him in a negus. The mistress has just gone\
      up.\'94\
\
      Soames hung his hat on a mahogany stag\'92s-horn.\
\
      \'93All right, Warmson, you can go to bed; I\'92ll take him up myself.\'94\
      And he passed into the dining-room.\
\
      James was sitting before the fire, in a big armchair, with a\
      camel-hair shawl, very light and warm, over his frock-coated\
      shoulders, on to which his long white whiskers drooped. His white\
      hair, still fairly thick, glistened in the lamplight; a little\
      moisture from his fixed, light-grey eyes stained the cheeks,\
      still quite well coloured, and the long deep furrows running to\
      the corners of the clean-shaven lips, which moved as if mumbling\
      thoughts. His long legs, thin as a crow\'92s, in shepherd\'92s plaid\
      trousers, were bent at less than a right angle, and on one knee a\
      spindly hand moved continually, with fingers wide apart and\
      glistening tapered nails. Beside him, on a low stool, stood a\
      half-finished glass of negus, bedewed with beads of heat. There\
      he had been sitting, with intervals for meals, all day. At\
      eighty-eight he was still organically sound, but suffering\
      terribly from the thought that no one ever told him anything. It\
      is, indeed, doubtful how he had become aware that Roger was being\
      buried that day, for Emily had kept it from him. She was always\
      keeping things from him. Emily was only seventy! James had a\
      grudge against his wife\'92s youth. He felt sometimes that he would\
      never have married her if he had known that she would have so\
      many years before her, when he had so few. It was not natural.\
      She would live fifteen or twenty years after he was gone, and\
      might spend a lot of money; she had always had extravagant\
      tastes. For all he knew she might want to buy one of these\
      motor-cars. Cicely and Rachel and Imogen and all the young\
      people\'97they all rode those bicycles now and went off Goodness\
      knew where. And now Roger was gone. He didn\'92t know\'97couldn\'92t tell!\
      The family was breaking up. Soames would know how much his uncle\
      had left. Curiously he thought of Roger as Soames\'92 uncle not as\
      his own brother. Soames! It was more and more the one solid spot\
      in a vanishing world. Soames was careful; he was a warm man; but\
      he had no one to leave his money to. There it was! He didn\'92t\
      know! And there was that fellow Chamberlain! For James\'92 political\
      principles had been fixed between \'9270 and \'9285 when \'93that rascally\
      Radical\'94 had been the chief thorn in the side of property and he\
      distrusted him to this day in spite of his conversion; he would\
      get the country into a mess and make money go down before he had\
      done with it. A stormy petrel of a chap! Where was Soames? He had\
      gone to the funeral of course which they had tried to keep from\
      him. He knew that perfectly well; he had seen his son\'92s trousers.\
      Roger! Roger in his coffin! He remembered how, when they came up\
      from school together from the West, on the box seat of the old\
      Slowflyer in 1824, Roger had got into the \'93boot\'94 and gone to\
      sleep. James uttered a thin cackle. A funny fellow\'97Roger\'97an\
      original! He didn\'92t know! Younger than himself, and in his\
      coffin! The family was breaking up. There was Val going to the\
      university; he never came to see him now. He would cost a pretty\
      penny up there. It was an extravagant age. And all the pretty\
      pennies that his four grandchildren would cost him danced before\
      James\'92 eyes. He did not grudge them the money, but he grudged\
      terribly the risk which the spending of that money might bring on\
      them; _he grudged the diminution of security_. And now that\
      Cicely had married, she might be having children too. He didn\'92t\
      know\'97couldn\'92t tell! Nobody thought of anything but spending money\
      in these days, and racing about, and having what they called \'93a\
      good time.\'94 A motor-car went past the window. Ugly great\
      lumbering thing, making all that racket! But there it was, the\
      country rattling to the dogs! People in such a hurry that they\
      couldn\'92t even care for style\'97a neat turnout like his barouche and\
      bays was worth all those new-fangled things. And consols at 116!\
      There must be a lot of money in the country. And now there was\
      this old Kruger! They had tried to keep old Kruger from him. But\
      he knew better; there would be a pretty kettle of fish out there!\
      He had known how it would be when that fellow Gladstone\'97dead now,\
      thank God! made such a mess of it after that dreadful business at\
      Majuba. He shouldn\'92t wonder if the Empire split up and went to\
      pot. And this vision of the Empire going to pot filled a full\
      quarter of an hour with qualms of the most serious character. He\
      had eaten a poor lunch because of them. But it was after lunch\
      that the real disaster to his nerves occurred. He had been dozing\
      when he became aware of voices\'97low voices. Ah! they never told\
      him anything! Winifred\'92s and her mother\'92s. \'93Monty!\'94 That fellow\
      Dartie\'97always that fellow Dartie! The voices had receded; and\
      James had been left alone, with his ears standing up like a\
      hare\'92s, and fear creeping about his inwards. Why did they leave\
      him alone? Why didn\'92t they come and tell him? And an awful\
      thought, which through long years had haunted him, concreted\
      again swiftly in his brain. Dartie had gone bankrupt\'97fraudulently\
      bankrupt, and to save Winifred and the children, he\'97James\'97would\
      have to pay! Could he\'97could Soames turn him into a limited\
      company? No, he couldn\'92t! There it was! With every minute before\
      Emily came back the spectre fiercened. Why, it might be forgery!\
      With eyes fixed on the doubted Turner in the centre of the wall,\
      James suffered tortures. He saw Dartie in the dock, his\
      grandchildren in the gutter, and himself in bed. He saw the\
      doubted Turner being sold at Jobson\'92s, and all the majestic\
      edifice of property in rags. He saw in fancy Winifred\
      unfashionably dressed, and heard in fancy Emily\'92s voice saying:\
      \'93Now, don\'92t fuss, James!\'94 She was always saying: \'93Don\'92t fuss!\'94\
      She had no nerves; he ought never to have married a woman\
      eighteen years younger than himself. Then Emily\'92s real voice\
      said:\
\
      \'93Have you had a nice nap, James?\'94\
\
      Nap! He was in torment, and she asked him that!\
\
      \'93What\'92s this about Dartie?\'94 he said, and his eyes glared at her.\
\
      Emily\'92s self-possession never deserted her.\
\
      \'93What have you been hearing?\'94 she asked blandly.\
\
      \'93What\'92s this about Dartie?\'94 repeated James. \'93He\'92s gone bankrupt.\'94\
\
      \'93Fiddle!\'94\
\
      James made a great effort, and rose to the full height of his\
      stork-like figure.\
\
      \'93You never tell me anything,\'94 he said; \'93he\'92s gone bankrupt.\'94\
\
      The destruction of that fixed idea seemed to Emily all that\
      mattered at the moment.\
\
      \'93He has not,\'94 she answered firmly. \'93He\'92s gone to Buenos Aires.\'94\
\
      If she had said \'93He\'92s gone to Mars\'94 she could not have dealt\
      James a more stunning blow; his imagination, invested entirely in\
      British securities, could as little grasp one place as the other.\
\
      \'93What\'92s he gone there for?\'94 he said. \'93He\'92s got no money. What did\
      he take?\'94\
\
      Agitated within by Winifred\'92s news, and goaded by the constant\
      reiteration of this jeremiad, Emily said calmly:\
\
      \'93He took Winifred\'92s pearls and a dancer.\'94\
\
      \'93What!\'94 said James, and sat down.\
\
      His sudden collapse alarmed her, and smoothing his forehead, she\
      said:\
\
      \'93Now, don\'92t fuss, James!\'94\
\
      A dusky red had spread over James\'92 cheeks and forehead.\
\
      \'93I paid for them,\'94 he said tremblingly; \'93he\'92s a thief! I\'97I knew\
      how it would be. He\'92ll be the death of me; he ....\'94 Words failed\
      him and he sat quite still. Emily, who thought she knew him so\
      well, was alarmed, and went towards the sideboard where she kept\
      some sal volatile. She could not see the tenacious Forsyte spirit\
      working in that thin, tremulous shape against the extravagance of\
      the emotion called up by this outrage on Forsyte principles\'97the\
      Forsyte spirit deep in there, saying: \'93You mustn\'92t get into a\
      fantod, it\'92ll never do. You won\'92t digest your lunch. You\'92ll have\
      a fit!\'94 All unseen by her, it was doing better work in James than\
      sal volatile.\
\
      \'93Drink this,\'94 she said.\
\
      James waved it aside.\
\
      \'93What was Winifred about,\'94 he said, \'93to let him take her pearls?\'94\
      Emily perceived the crisis past.\
\
      \'93She can have mine,\'94 she said comfortably. \'93I never wear them.\
      She\'92d better get a divorce.\'94\
\
      \'93There you go!\'94 said James. \'93Divorce! We\'92ve never had a divorce\
      in the family. Where\'92s Soames?\'94\
\
      \'93He\'92ll be in directly.\'94\
\
      \'93No, he won\'92t,\'94 said James, almost fiercely; \'93he\'92s at the\
      funeral. You think I know nothing.\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Emily with calm, \'93you shouldn\'92t get into such fusses\
      when we tell you things.\'94 And plumping up his cushions, and\
      putting the sal volatile beside him, she left the room.\
\
      But James sat there seeing visions\'97of Winifred in the Divorce\
      Court, and the family name in the papers; of the earth falling on\
      Roger\'92s coffin; of Val taking after his father; of the pearls he\
      had paid for and would never see again; of money back at four per\
      cent., and the country going to the dogs; and, as the afternoon\
      wore into evening, and tea-time passed, and dinnertime, those\
      visions became more and more mixed and menacing\'97of being told\
      nothing, till he had nothing left of all his wealth, and they\
      told him nothing of it. Where was Soames? Why didn\'92t he come\
      in?... His hand grasped the glass of negus, he raised it to\
      drink, and saw his son standing there looking at him. A little\
      sigh of relief escaped his lips, and putting the glass down, he\
      said:\
\
      \'93There you are! Dartie\'92s gone to Buenos Aires.\'94\
\
      Soames nodded. \'93That\'92s all right,\'94 he said; \'93good riddance.\'94\
\
      A wave of assuagement passed over James\'92 brain. Soames knew.\
      Soames was the only one of them all who had sense. Why couldn\'92t\
      he come and live at home? He had no son of his own. And he said\
      plaintively:\
\
      \'93At my age I get nervous. I wish you were more at home, my boy.\'94\
\
      Again Soames nodded; the mask of his countenance betrayed no\
      understanding, but he went closer, and as if by accident touched\
      his father\'92s shoulder.\
\
      \'93They sent their love to you at Timothy\'92s,\'94 he said. \'93It went off\
      all right. I\'92ve been to see Winifred. I\'92m going to take steps.\'94\
      And he thought: \'93Yes, and you mustn\'92t hear of them.\'94\
\
      James looked up; his long white whiskers quivered, his thin\
      throat between the points of his collar looked very gristly and\
      naked.\
\
      \'93I\'92ve been very poorly all day,\'94 he said; \'93they never tell me\
      anything.\'94\
\
      Soames\'92 heart twitched.\
\
      \'93Well, it\'92s all right. There\'92s nothing to worry about. Will you\
      come up now?\'94 and he put his hand under his father\'92s arm.\
\
      James obediently and tremulously raised himself, and together\
      they went slowly across the room, which had a rich look in the\
      firelight, and out to the stairs. Very slowly they ascended.\
\
      \'93Good-night, my boy,\'94 said James at his bedroom door.\
\
      \'93Good-night, father,\'94 answered Soames. His hand stroked down the\
      sleeve beneath the shawl; it seemed to have almost nothing in it,\
      so thin was the arm. And, turning away from the light in the\
      opening doorway, he went up the extra flight to his own bedroom.\
\
      \'93I want a son,\'94 he thought, sitting on the edge of his bed; \'93_I\
      want a son_.\'94\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER VI NO-LONGER-YOUNG JOLYON AT HOME\
\
\
      Trees take little account of time, and the old oak on the upper\
      lawn at Robin Hill looked no day older than when Bosinney\
      sprawled under it and said to Soames: \'93Forsyte, I\'92ve found the\
      very place for your house.\'94 Since then Swithin had dreamed, and\
      old Jolyon died, beneath its branches. And now, close to the\
      swing, no-longer-young Jolyon often painted there. Of all spots\
      in the world it was perhaps the most sacred to him, for he had\
      loved his father.\
\
      Contemplating its great girth\'97crinkled and a little mossed, but\
      not yet hollow\'97he would speculate on the passage of time. That\
      tree had seen, perhaps, all real English history; it dated, he\
      shouldn\'92t wonder, from the days of Elizabeth at least. His own\
      fifty years were as nothing to its wood. When the house behind\
      it, which he now owned, was three hundred years of age instead of\
      twelve, that tree might still be standing there, vast and\
      hollow\'97for who would commit such sacrilege as to cut it down? A\
      Forsyte might perhaps still be living in that house, to guard it\
      jealously. And Jolyon would wonder what the house would look like\
      coated with such age. Wistaria was already about its walls\'97the\
      new look had gone. Would it hold its own and keep the dignity\
      Bosinney had bestowed on it, or would the giant London have\
      lapped it round and made it into an asylum in the midst of a\
      jerry-built wilderness? Often, within and without of it, he was\
      persuaded that Bosinney had been moved by the spirit when he\
      built. He had put his heart into that house, indeed! It might\
      even become one of the \'93homes of England\'94\'97a rare achievement for\
      a house in these degenerate days of building. And the aesthetic\
      spirit, moving hand in hand with his Forsyte sense of possessive\
      continuity, dwelt with pride and pleasure on his ownership\
      thereof. There was the smack of reverence and ancestor-worship\
      (if only for one ancestor) in his desire to hand this house down\
      to his son and his son\'92s son. His father had loved the house, had\
      loved the view, the grounds, that tree; his last years had been\
      happy there, and no one had lived there before him. These last\
      eleven years at Robin Hill had formed in Jolyon\'92s life as a\
      painter, the important period of success. He was now in the very\
      van of water-colour art, hanging on the line everywhere. His\
      drawings fetched high prices. Specialising in that one medium\
      with the tenacity of his breed, he had \'93arrived\'94\'97rather late, but\
      not too late for a member of the family which made a point of\
      living for ever. His art had really deepened and improved. In\
      conformity with his position he had grown a short fair beard,\
      which was just beginning to grizzle, and hid his Forsyte chin;\
      his brown face had lost the warped expression of his ostracised\
      period\'97he looked, if anything, younger. The loss of his wife in\
      1894 had been one of those domestic tragedies which turn out in\
      the end for the good of all. He had, indeed, loved her to the\
      last, for his was an affectionate spirit, but she had become\
      increasingly difficult: jealous of her step-daughter June,\
      jealous even of her own little daughter Holly, and making\
      ceaseless plaint that he could not love her, ill as she was, and\
      \'93useless to everyone, and better dead.\'94 He had mourned her\
      sincerely, but his face had looked younger since she died. If she\
      could only have believed that she made him happy, how much\
      happier would the twenty years of their companionship have been!\
\
      June had never really got on well with her who had reprehensibly\
      taken her own mother\'92s place; and ever since old Jolyon died she\
      had been established in a sort of studio in London. But she had\
      come back to Robin Hill on her stepmother\'92s death, and gathered\
      the reins there into her small decided hands. Jolly was then at\
      Harrow; Holly still learning from Mademoiselle Beauce. There had\
      been nothing to keep Jolyon at home, and he had removed his grief\
      and his paint-box abroad. There he had wandered, for the most\
      part in Brittany, and at last had fetched up in Paris. He had\
      stayed there several months, and come back with the younger face\
      and the short fair beard. Essentially a man who merely lodged in\
      any house, it had suited him perfectly that June should reign at\
      Robin Hill, so that he was free to go off with his easel where\
      and when he liked. She was inclined, it is true, to regard the\
      house rather as an asylum for her _prot\'e9g\'e9s;_ but his own outcast\
      days had filled Jolyon for ever with sympathy towards an outcast,\
      and June\'92s \'93lame ducks\'94 about the place did not annoy him. By all\
      means let her have them down\'97and feed them up; and though his\
      slightly cynical humour perceived that they ministered to his\
      daughter\'92s love of domination as well as moved her warm heart, he\
      never ceased to admire her for having so many ducks. He fell,\
      indeed, year by year into a more and more detached and brotherly\
      attitude towards his own son and daughters, treating them with a\
      sort of whimsical equality. When he went down to Harrow to see\
      Jolly, he never quite knew which of them was the elder, and would\
      sit eating cherries with him out of one paper bag, with an\
      affectionate and ironical smile twisting up an eyebrow and\
      curling his lips a little. And he was always careful to have\
      money in his pocket, and to be modish in his dress, so that his\
      son need not blush for him. They were perfect friends, but never\
      seemed to have occasion for verbal confidences, both having the\
      competitive self-consciousness of Forsytes. They knew they would\
      stand by each other in scrapes, but there was no need to talk\
      about it. Jolyon had a striking horror\'97partly original sin, but\
      partly the result of his early immorality\'97of the moral attitude.\
      The most he could ever have said to his son would have been:\
\
      \'93Look here, old man; don\'92t forget you\'92re a gentleman,\'94 and then\
      have wondered whimsically whether that was not a snobbish\
      sentiment. The great cricket match was perhaps the most searching\
      and awkward time they annually went through together, for Jolyon\
      had been at Eton. They would be particularly careful during that\
      match, continually saying: \'93Hooray! Oh! hard luck, old man!\'94 or\
      \'93Hooray! Oh! bad luck, Dad!\'94 to each other, when some disaster at\
      which their hearts bounded happened to the opposing school. And\
      Jolyon would wear a grey top hat, instead of his usual soft one,\
      to save his son\'92s feelings, for a black top hat he could not\
      stomach. When Jolly went up to Oxford, Jolyon went up with him,\
      amused, humble, and a little anxious not to discredit his boy\
      amongst all these youths who seemed so much more assured and old\
      than himself. He often thought, \'93Glad I\'92m a painter\'94 for he had\
      long dropped under-writing at Lloyds\'97\'93it\'92s so innocuous. You\
      can\'92t look down on a painter\'97you can\'92t take him seriously\
      enough.\'94 For Jolly, who had a sort of natural lordliness, had\
      passed at once into a very small set, who secretly amused his\
      father. The boy had fair hair which curled a little, and his\
      grandfather\'92s deepset iron-grey eyes. He was well-built and very\
      upright, and always pleased Jolyon\'92s aesthetic sense, so that he\
      was a tiny bit afraid of him, as artists ever are of those of\
      their own sex whom they admire physically. On that occasion,\
      however, he actually did screw up his courage to give his son\
      advice, and this was it:\
\
      \'93Look here, old man, you\'92re bound to get into debt; mind you come\
      to me at once. Of course, I\'92ll always pay them. But you might\
      remember that one respects oneself more afterwards if one pays\
      one\'92s own way. And don\'92t ever borrow, except from me, will you?\'94\
\
      And Jolly had said:\
\
      \'93All right, Dad, I won\'92t,\'94 and he never had.\
\
      \'93And there\'92s just one other thing. I don\'92t know much about\
      morality and that, but there is this: It\'92s always worth while\
      before you do anything to consider whether it\'92s going to hurt\
      another person more than is absolutely necessary.\'94\
\
      Jolly had looked thoughtful, and nodded, and presently had\
      squeezed his father\'92s hand. And Jolyon had thought: \'93I wonder if\
      I had the right to say that?\'94 He always had a sort of dread of\
      losing the dumb confidence they had in each other; remembering\
      how for long years he had lost his own father\'92s, so that there\
      had been nothing between them but love at a great distance. He\
      under-estimated, no doubt, the change in the spirit of the age\
      since he himself went up to Cambridge in \'9265; and perhaps he\
      underestimated, too, his boy\'92s power of understanding that he was\
      tolerant to the very bone. It was that tolerance of his, and\
      possibly his scepticism, which ever made his relations towards\
      June so queerly defensive. She was such a decided mortal; knew\
      her own mind so terribly well; wanted things so inexorably until\
      she got them\'97and then, indeed, often dropped them like a hot\
      potato. Her mother had been like that, whence had come all those\
      tears. Not that his incompatibility with his daughter was\
      anything like what it had been with the first Mrs. Young Jolyon.\
      One could be amused where a daughter was concerned; in a wife\'92s\
      case one could not be amused. To see June set her heart and jaw\
      on a thing until she got it was all right, because it was never\
      anything which interfered fundamentally with Jolyon\'92s liberty\'97the\
      one thing on which his jaw was also absolutely rigid, a\
      considerable jaw, under that short grizzling beard. Nor was there\
      ever any necessity for real heart-to-heart encounters. One could\
      break away into irony\'97as indeed he often had to. But the real\
      trouble with June was that she had never appealed to his\
      aesthetic sense, though she might well have, with her red-gold\
      hair and her viking-coloured eyes, and that touch of the\
      Berserker in her spirit. It was very different with Holly, soft\
      and quiet, shy and affectionate, with a playful imp in her\
      somewhere. He watched this younger daughter of his through the\
      duckling stage with extraordinary interest. Would she come out a\
      swan? With her sallow oval face and her grey wistful eyes and\
      those long dark lashes, she might, or she might not. Only this\
      last year had he been able to guess. Yes, she would be a\
      swan\'97rather a dark one, always a shy one, but an authentic swan.\
      She was eighteen now, and Mademoiselle Beauce was gone\'97the\
      excellent lady had removed, after eleven years haunted by her\
      continuous reminiscences of the \'93well-brrred little Tayleurs,\'94 to\
      another family whose bosom would now be agitated by her\
      reminiscences of the \'93well-brrred little Forsytes.\'94 She had\
      taught Holly to speak French like herself.\
\
      Portraiture was not Jolyon\'92s forte, but he had already drawn his\
      younger daughter three times, and was drawing her a fourth, on\
      the afternoon of October 4th, 1899, when a card was brought to\
      him which caused his eyebrows to go up:\
                     MR. SOAMES FORSYTE\
           THE SHELTER,         CONNOISSEURS CLUB, MAPLEDURHAM.        \
           ST. JAMES\'92S.\
      But here the Forsyte Saga must digress again....\
\
      To return from a long travel in Spain to a darkened house, to a\
      little daughter bewildered with tears, to the sight of a loved\
      father lying peaceful in his last sleep, had never been, was\
      never likely to be, forgotten by so impressionable and\
      warm-hearted a man as Jolyon. A sense as of mystery, too, clung\
      to that sad day, and about the end of one whose life had been so\
      well-ordered, balanced, and above-board. It seemed incredible\
      that his father could thus have vanished without, as it were,\
      announcing his intention, without last words to his son, and due\
      farewells. And those incoherent allusions of little Holly to \'93the\
      lady in grey,\'94 of Mademoiselle Beauce to a Madame Errant (as it\
      sounded) involved all things in a mist, lifted a little when he\
      read his father\'92s will and the codicil thereto. It had been his\
      duty as executor of that will and codicil to inform Irene, wife\
      of his cousin Soames, of her life interest in fifteen thousand\
      pounds. He had called on her to explain that the existing\
      investment in India Stock, ear-marked to meet the charge, would\
      produce for her the interesting net sum of \'a3430 odd a year, clear\
      of income tax. This was but the third time he had seen his cousin\
      Soames\'92 wife\'97if indeed she was still his wife, of which he was\
      not quite sure. He remembered having seen her sitting in the\
      Botanical Gardens waiting for Bosinney\'97a passive, fascinating\
      figure, reminding him of Titian\'92s \'93Heavenly Love,\'94 and again,\
      when, charged by his father, he had gone to Montpellier Square on\
      the afternoon when Bosinney\'92s death was known. He still recalled\
      vividly her sudden appearance in the drawing-room doorway on that\
      occasion\'97her beautiful face, passing from wild eagerness of hope\
      to stony despair; remembered the compassion he had felt, Soames\'92\
      snarling smile, his words, \'93We are not at home!\'94 and the slam of\
      the front door.\
\
      This third time he saw a face and form more beautiful\'97freed from\
      that warp of wild hope and despair. Looking at her, he thought:\
      \'93Yes, you are just what the Dad would have admired!\'94 And the\
      strange story of his father\'92s Indian summer became slowly clear\
      to him. She spoke of old Jolyon with reverence and tears in her\
      eyes. \'93He was so wonderfully kind to me; I don\'92t know why. He\
      looked so beautiful and peaceful sitting in that chair under the\
      tree; it was I who first came on him sitting there, you know.\
      Such a lovely day. I don\'92t think an end could have been happier.\
      We should all like to go out like that.\'94\
\
      \'93Quite right!\'94 he had thought. \'93We should all like to go out in\
      full summer with beauty stepping towards us across a lawn.\'94\
\
      And looking round the little, almost empty drawing-room, he had\
      asked her what she was going to do now. \'93I am going to live again\
      a little, Cousin Jolyon. It\'92s wonderful to have money of one\'92s\
      own. I\'92ve never had any. I shall keep this flat, I think; I\'92m\
      used to it; but I shall be able to go to Italy.\'94\
\
      \'93Exactly!\'94 Jolyon had murmured, looking at her faintly smiling\
      lips; and he had gone away thinking: \'93A fascinating woman! What a\
      waste! I\'92m glad the Dad left her that money.\'94 He had not seen her\
      again, but every quarter he had signed her cheque, forwarding it\
      to her bank, with a note to the Chelsea flat to say that he had\
      done so; and always he had received a note in acknowledgment,\
      generally from the flat, but sometimes from Italy; so that her\
      personality had become embodied in slightly scented grey paper,\
      an upright fine handwriting, and the words, \'93Dear Cousin Jolyon.\'94\
      Man of property that he now was, the slender cheque he signed\
      often gave rise to the thought: \'93Well, I suppose she just\
      manages\'94; sliding into a vague wonder how she was faring\
      otherwise in a world of men not wont to let beauty go\
      unpossessed. At first Holly had spoken of her sometimes, but\
      \'93ladies in grey\'94 soon fade from children\'92s memories; and the\
      tightening of June\'92s lips in those first weeks after her\
      grandfather\'92s death whenever her former friend\'92s name was\
      mentioned, had discouraged allusion. Only once, indeed, had June\
      spoken definitely: \'93I\'92ve forgiven her. I\'92m frightfully glad she\'92s\
      independent now....\'94\
\
      On receiving Soames\'92 card, Jolyon said to the maid\'97for he could\
      not abide butlers\'97\'93Show him into the study, please, and say I\'92ll\
      be there in a minute\'94; and then he looked at Holly and asked:\
\
      \'93Do you remember \'91the lady in grey,\'92 who used to give you\
      music-lessons?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh yes, why? Has she come?\'94\
\
      Jolyon shook his head, and, changing his holland blouse for a\
      coat, was silent, perceiving suddenly that such history was not\
      for those young ears. His face, in fact, became whimsical\
      perplexity incarnate while he journeyed towards the study.\
\
      Standing by the french-window, looking out across the terrace at\
      the oak tree, were two figures, middle-aged and young, and he\
      thought: \'93Who\'92s that boy? Surely they never had a child.\'94\
\
      The elder figure turned. The meeting of those two Forsytes of the\
      second generation, so much more sophisticated than the first, in\
      the house built for the one and owned and occupied by the other,\
      was marked by subtle defensiveness beneath distinct attempt at\
      cordiality. \'93Has he come about his wife?\'94 Jolyon was thinking;\
      and Soames, \'93How shall I begin?\'94 while Val, brought to break the\
      ice, stood negligently scrutinising this \'93bearded pard\'94 from\
      under his dark, thick eyelashes.\
\
      \'93This is Val Dartie,\'94 said Soames, \'93my sister\'92s son. He\'92s just\
      going up to Oxford. I thought I\'92d like him to know your boy.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah! I\'92m sorry Jolly\'92s away. What college?\'94\
\
      \'93B.N.C.,\'94 replied Val.\
\
      \'93Jolly\'92s at the \'91House,\'92 but he\'92ll be delighted to look you up.\'94\
\
      \'93Thanks awfully.\'94\
\
      \'93Holly\'92s in\'97if you could put up with a female relation, she\'92d\
      show you round. You\'92ll find her in the hall if you go through the\
      curtains. I was just painting her.\'94\
\
      With another \'93Thanks, awfully!\'94 Val vanished, leaving the two\
      cousins with the ice unbroken.\
\
      \'93I see you\'92ve some drawings at the \'91Water Colours,\'92\'94 said Soames.\
\
      Jolyon winced. He had been out of touch with the Forsyte family\
      at large for twenty-six years, but they were connected in his\
      mind with Frith\'92s \'93Derby Day\'94 and Landseer prints. He had heard\
      from June that Soames was a connoisseur, which made it worse. He\
      had become aware, too, of a curious sensation of repugnance.\
\
      \'93I haven\'92t seen you for a long time,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93No,\'94 answered Soames between close lips, \'93not since\'97as a matter\
      of fact, it\'92s about that I\'92ve come. You\'92re her trustee, I\'92m\
      told.\'94\
\
      Jolyon nodded.\
\
      \'93Twelve years is a long time,\'94 said Soames rapidly: \'93I\'97I\'92m tired\
      of it.\'94\
\
      Jolyon found no more appropriate answer than:\
\
      \'93Won\'92t you smoke?\'94\
\
      \'93No, thanks.\'94\
\
      Jolyon himself lit a cigarette.\
\
      \'93I wish to be free,\'94 said Soames abruptly.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t see her,\'94 murmured Jolyon through the fume of his\
      cigarette.\
\
      \'93But you know where she lives, I suppose?\'94\
\
      Jolyon nodded. He did not mean to give her address without\
      permission. Soames seemed to divine his thought.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t want her address,\'94 he said; \'93I know it.\'94\
\
      \'93What exactly do you want?\'94\
\
      \'93She deserted me. I want a divorce.\'94\
\
      \'93Rather late in the day, isn\'92t it?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Soames. And there was a silence.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know much about these things\'97at least, I\'92ve forgotten,\'94\
      said Jolyon with a wry smile. He himself had had to wait for\
      death to grant him a divorce from the first Mrs. Jolyon. \'93Do you\
      wish me to see her about it?\'94\
\
      Soames raised his eyes to his cousin\'92s face. \'93I suppose there\'92s\
      someone,\'94 he said.\
\
      A shrug moved Jolyon\'92s shoulders.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know at all. I imagine you may have both lived as if the\
      other were dead. It\'92s usual in these cases.\'94\
\
      Soames turned to the window. A few early fallen oak-leaves\
      strewed the terrace already, and were rolling round in the wind.\
      Jolyon saw the figures of Holly and Val Dartie moving across the\
      lawn towards the stables. \'93I\'92m not going to run with the hare and\
      hunt with the hounds,\'94 he thought. \'93I must act for her. The Dad\
      would have wished that.\'94 And for a swift moment he seemed to see\
      his father\'92s figure in the old armchair, just beyond Soames,\
      sitting with knees crossed, _The Times_ in his hand. It vanished.\
\
      \'93My father was fond of her,\'94 he said quietly.\
\
      \'93Why he should have been I don\'92t know,\'94 Soames answered without\
      looking round. \'93She brought trouble to your daughter June; she\
      brought trouble to everyone. I gave her all she wanted. I would\
      have given her even\'97forgiveness\'97but she chose to leave me.\'94\
\
      In Jolyon compassion was checked by the tone of that close voice.\
      What was there in the fellow that made it so difficult to be\
      sorry for him?\
\
      \'93I can go and see her, if you like,\'94 he said. \'93I suppose she\
      might be glad of a divorce, but I know nothing.\'94\
\
      Soames nodded.\
\
      \'93Yes, please go. As I say, I know her address; but I\'92ve no wish\
      to see her.\'94 His tongue was busy with his lips, as if they were\
      very dry.\
\
      \'93You\'92ll have some tea?\'94 said Jolyon, stifling the words: \'93And see\
      the house.\'94 And he led the way into the hall. When he had rung\
      the bell and ordered tea, he went to his easel to turn his\
      drawing to the wall. He could not bear, somehow, that his work\
      should be seen by Soames, who was standing there in the middle of\
      the great room which had been designed expressly to afford wall\
      space for his own pictures. In his cousin\'92s face, with its\
      unseizable family likeness to himself, and its chinny, narrow,\
      concentrated look, Jolyon saw that which moved him to the\
      thought: \'93That chap could never forget anything\'97nor ever give\
      himself away. He\'92s pathetic!\'94\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER VII THE COLT AND THE FILLY\
\
\
      When young Val left the presence of the last generation he was\
      thinking: \'93This is jolly dull! Uncle Soames does take the bun. I\
      wonder what this filly\'92s like?\'94 He anticipated no pleasure from\
      her society; and suddenly he saw her standing there looking at\
      him. Why, she was pretty! What luck!\
\
      \'93I\'92m afraid you don\'92t know me,\'94 he said. \'93My name\'92s Val\
      Dartie\'97I\'92m once removed, second cousin, something like that, you\
      know. My mother\'92s name was Forsyte.\'94\
\
      Holly, whose slim brown hand remained in his because she was too\
      shy to withdraw it, said:\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know any of my relations. Are there many?\'94\
\
      \'93Tons. They\'92re awful\'97most of them. At least, I don\'92t know\'97some of\
      them. One\'92s relations always are, aren\'92t they?\'94\
\
      \'93I expect they think one awful too,\'94 said Holly.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know why they should. No one could think you awful, of\
      course.\'94\
\
      Holly looked at him\'97the wistful candour in those grey eyes gave\
      young Val a sudden feeling that he must protect her.\
\
      \'93I mean there are people and people,\'94 he added astutely. \'93Your\
      dad looks awfully decent, for instance.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh yes!\'94 said Holly fervently; \'93he is.\'94\
\
      A flush mounted in Val\'92s cheeks\'97that scene in the Pandemonium\
      promenade\'97the dark man with the pink carnation developing into\
      his own father! \'93But you know what the Forsytes are,\'94 he said\
      almost viciously. \'93Oh! I forgot; you don\'92t.\'94\
\
      \'93What are they?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! fearfully careful; not sportsmen a bit. Look at Uncle\
      Soames!\'94\
\
      \'93I\'92d like to,\'94 said Holly.\
\
      Val resisted a desire to run his arm through hers. \'93Oh! no,\'94 he\
      said, \'93let\'92s go out. You\'92ll see him quite soon enough. What\'92s\
      your brother like?\'94\
\
      Holly led the way on to the terrace and down to the lawn without\
      answering. How describe Jolly, who, ever since she remembered\
      anything, had been her lord, master, and ideal?\
\
      \'93Does he sit on you?\'94 said Val shrewdly. \'93I shall be knowing him\
      at Oxford. Have you got any horses?\'94\
\
      Holly nodded. \'93Would you like to see the stables?\'94\
\
      \'93Rather!\'94\
\
      They passed under the oak tree, through a thin shrubbery, into\
      the stable-yard. There under a clock-tower lay a fluffy\
      brown-and-white dog, so old that he did not get up, but faintly\
      waved the tail curled over his back.\
\
      \'93That\'92s Balthasar,\'94 said Holly; \'93he\'92s so old\'97awfully old, nearly\
      as old as I am. Poor old boy! He\'92s devoted to Dad.\'94\
\
      \'93Balthasar! That\'92s a rum name. He isn\'92t purebred you know.\'94\
\
      \'93No! but he\'92s a darling,\'94 and she bent down to stroke the dog.\
      Gentle and supple, with dark covered head and slim browned neck\
      and hands, she seemed to Val strange and sweet, like a thing\
      slipped between him and all previous knowledge.\
\
      \'93When grandfather died,\'94 she said, \'93he wouldn\'92t eat for two days.\
      He saw him die, you know.\'94\
\
      \'93Was that old Uncle Jolyon? Mother always says he was a topper.\'94\
\
      \'93He was,\'94 said Holly simply, and opened the stable door.\
\
      In a loose-box stood a silver roan of about fifteen hands, with a\
      long black tail and mane. \'93This is mine\'97Fairy.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 said Val, \'93she\'92s a jolly palfrey. But you ought to bang her\
      tail. She\'92d look much smarter.\'94 Then catching her wondering look,\
      he thought suddenly: \'93I don\'92t know\'97anything she likes!\'94 And he\
      took a long sniff of the stable air. \'93Horses are ripping, aren\'92t\
      they? My Dad...\'94 he stopped.\
\
      \'93Yes?\'94 said Holly.\
\
      An impulse to unbosom himself almost overcame him\'97but not quite.\
      \'93Oh! I don\'92t know he\'92s often gone a mucker over them. I\'92m jolly\
      keen on them too\'97riding and hunting. I like racing awfully, as\
      well; I should like to be a gentleman rider.\'94 And oblivious of\
      the fact that he had but one more day in town, with two\
      engagements, he plumped out:\
\
      \'93I say, if I hire a gee to-morrow, will you come a ride in\
      Richmond Park?\'94\
\
      Holly clasped her hands.\
\
      \'93Oh yes! I simply love riding. But there\'92s Jolly\'92s horse; why\
      don\'92t you ride him? Here he is. We could go after tea.\'94\
\
      Val looked doubtfully at his trousered legs.\
\
      He had imagined them immaculate before her eyes in high brown\
      boots and Bedford cords.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t much like riding his horse,\'94 he said. \'93He mightn\'92t like\
      it. Besides, Uncle Soames wants to get back, I expect. Not that I\
      believe in buckling under to him, you know. You haven\'92t got an\
      uncle, have you? This is rather a good beast,\'94 he added,\
      scrutinising Jolly\'92s horse, a dark brown, which was showing the\
      whites of its eyes. \'93You haven\'92t got any hunting here, I\
      suppose?\'94\
\
      \'93No; I don\'92t know that I want to hunt. It must be awfully\
      exciting, of course; but it\'92s cruel, isn\'92t it? June says so.\'94\
\
      \'93Cruel?\'94 ejaculated Val. \'93Oh! that\'92s all rot. Who\'92s June?\'94\
\
      \'93My sister\'97my half-sister, you know\'97much older than me.\'94 She had\
      put her hands up to both cheeks of Jolly\'92s horse, and was rubbing\
      her nose against its nose with a gentle snuffling noise which\
      seemed to have an hypnotic effect on the animal. Val contemplated\
      her cheek resting against the horse\'92s nose, and her eyes gleaming\
      round at him. \'93She\'92s really a duck,\'94 he thought.\
\
      They returned to the house less talkative, followed this time by\
      the dog Balthasar, walking more slowly than anything on earth,\
      and clearly expecting them not to exceed his speed limit.\
\
      \'93This is a ripping place,\'94 said Val from under the oak tree,\
      where they had paused to allow the dog Balthasar to come up.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Holly, and sighed. \'93Of course I want to go\
      everywhere. I wish I were a gipsy.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, gipsies are jolly,\'94 replied Val, with a conviction which\
      had just come to him; \'93you\'92re rather like one, you know.\'94\
\
      Holly\'92s face shone suddenly and deeply, like dark leaves gilded\
      by the sun.\
\
      \'93To go mad-rabbiting everywhere and see everything, and live in\
      the open\'97oh! wouldn\'92t it be fun?\'94\
\
      \'93Let\'92s do it!\'94 said Val.\
\
      \'93Oh yes, let\'92s!\'94\
\
      \'93It\'92d be grand sport, just you and I.\'94\
\
      Then Holly perceived the quaintness and gushed.\
\
      \'93Well, we\'92ve got to do it,\'94 said Val obstinately, but reddening\
      too.\
\
      \'93I believe in doing things you want to do. What\'92s down there?\'94\
\
      \'93The kitchen-garden, and the pond and the coppice, and the farm.\'94\
\
      \'93Let\'92s go down!\'94\
\
      Holly glanced back at the house.\
\
      \'93It\'92s tea-time, I expect; there\'92s Dad beckoning.\'94\
\
      Val, uttering a growly sound, followed her towards the house.\
\
      When they re-entered the hall gallery the sight of two\
      middle-aged Forsytes drinking tea together had its magical\
      effect, and they became quite silent. It was, indeed, an\
      impressive spectacle. The two were seated side by side on an\
      arrangement in marqueterie which looked like three silvery pink\
      chairs made one, with a low tea-table in front of them. They\
      seemed to have taken up that position, as far apart as the seat\
      would permit, so that they need not look at each other too much;\
      and they were eating and drinking rather than talking\'97Soames with\
      his air of despising the tea-cake as it disappeared, Jolyon of\
      finding himself slightly amusing. To the casual eye neither would\
      have seemed greedy, but both were getting through a good deal of\
      sustenance. The two young ones having been supplied with food,\
      the process went on silent and absorbative, till, with the advent\
      of cigarettes, Jolyon said to Soames:\
\
      \'93And how\'92s Uncle James?\'94\
\
      \'93Thanks, very shaky.\'94\
\
      \'93We\'92re a wonderful family, aren\'92t we? The other day I was\
      calculating the average age of the ten old Forsytes from my\
      father\'92s family Bible. I make it eighty-four already, and five\
      still living. They ought to beat the record;\'94 and looking\
      whimsically at Soames, he added:\
\
      \'93We aren\'92t the men they were, you know.\'94\
\
      Soames smiled. \'93Do you really think I shall admit that I\'92m not\
      their equal\'94. he seemed to be saying, \'93or that I\'92ve got to give\
      up anything, especially life?\'94\
\
      \'93We may live to their age, perhaps,\'94 pursued Jolyon, \'93but\
      self-consciousness is a handicap, you know, and that\'92s the\
      difference between us. We\'92ve lost conviction. How and when\
      self-consciousness was born I never can make out. My father had a\
      little, but I don\'92t believe any other of the old Forsytes ever\
      had a scrap. Never to see yourself as others see you, it\'92s a\
      wonderful preservative. The whole history of the last century is\
      in the difference between us. And between us and you,\'94 he added,\
      gazing through a ring of smoke at Val and Holly, uncomfortable\
      under his quizzical regard, \'93there\'92ll be\'97another difference. I\
      wonder what.\'94\
\
      Soames took out his watch.\
\
      \'93We must go,\'94 he said, \'93if we\'92re to catch our train.\'94\
\
      \'93Uncle Soames never misses a train,\'94 muttered Val, with his mouth\
      full.\
\
      \'93Why should I?\'94 Soames answered simply.\
\
      \'93Oh! I don\'92t know,\'94 grumbled Val, \'93other people do.\'94\
\
      At the front door he gave Holly\'92s slim brown hand a long and\
      surreptitious squeeze.\
\
      \'93Look out for me to-morrow,\'94 he whispered; \'93three o\'92clock. I\'92ll\
      wait for you in the road; it\'92ll save time. We\'92ll have a ripping\
      ride.\'94 He gazed back at her from the lodge gate, and, but for the\
      principles of a man about town, would have waved his hand. He\
      felt in no mood to tolerate his uncle\'92s conversation. But he was\
      not in danger. Soames preserved a perfect muteness, busy with\
      far-away thoughts.\
\
      The yellow leaves came down about those two walking the mile and\
      a half which Soames had traversed so often in those long-ago days\
      when he came down to watch with secret pride the building of the\
      house\'97that house which was to have been the home of him and her\
      from whom he was now going to seek release. He looked back once,\
      up that endless vista of autumn lane between the yellowing\
      hedges. What an age ago! \'93I don\'92t want to see her,\'94 he had said\
      to Jolyon. Was that true? \'93I may have to,\'94 he thought; and he\
      shivered, seized by one of those queer shudderings that they say\
      mean footsteps on one\'92s grave. A chilly world! A queer world! And\
      glancing sidelong at his nephew, he thought: \'93Wish I were his\
      age! I wonder what she\'92s like now!\'94\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER VIII JOLYON PROSECUTES TRUSTEESHIP\
\
\
      When those two were gone Jolyon did not return to his painting,\
      for daylight was failing, but went to the study, craving\
      unconsciously a revival of that momentary vision of his father\
      sitting in the old leather chair with his knees crossed and his\
      straight eyes gazing up from under the dome of his massive brow.\
      Often in this little room, cosiest in the house, Jolyon would\
      catch a moment of communion with his father. Not, indeed, that he\
      had definitely any faith in the persistence of the human\
      spirit\'97the feeling was not so logical\'97it was, rather, an\
      atmospheric impact, like a scent, or one of those strong\
      animistic impressions from forms, or effects of light, to which\
      those with the artist\'92s eye are especially prone. Here only\'97in\
      this little unchanged room where his father had spent the most of\
      his waking hours\'97could be retrieved the feeling that he was not\
      quite gone, that the steady counsel of that old spirit and the\
      warmth of his masterful lovability endured.\
\
      What would his father be advising now, in this sudden\
      recrudescence of an old tragedy\'97what would he say to this menace\
      against her to whom he had taken such a fancy in the last weeks\
      of his life? \'93I must do my best for her,\'94 thought Jolyon; \'93he\
      left her to me in his will. But what _is_ the best?\'94\
\
      And as if seeking to regain the sapience, the balance and shrewd\
      common sense of that old Forsyte, he sat down in the ancient\
      chair and crossed his knees. But he felt a mere shadow sitting\
      there; nor did any inspiration come, while the fingers of the\
      wind tapped on the darkening panes of the french-window.\
\
      \'93Go and see her?\'94 he thought, \'93or ask her to come down here?\
      What\'92s her life been? What is it now, I wonder? Beastly to rake\
      up things at this time of day.\'94 Again the figure of his cousin\
      standing with a hand on a front door of a fine olive-green leaped\
      out, vivid, like one of those figures from old-fashioned clocks\
      when the hour strikes; and his words sounded in Jolyon\'92s ears\
      clearer than any chime: \'93I manage my own affairs. I\'92ve told you\
      once, I tell you again: We are not at home.\'94 The repugnance he\
      had then felt for Soames\'97for his flat-cheeked, shaven face full\
      of spiritual bull-doggedness; for his spare, square, sleek figure\
      slightly crouched as it were over the bone he could not\
      digest\'97came now again, fresh as ever, nay, with an odd increase.\
      \'93I dislike him,\'94 he thought, \'93I dislike him to the very roots of\
      me. And that\'92s lucky; it\'92ll make it easier for me to back his\
      wife.\'94 Half-artist, and half-Forsyte, Jolyon was constitutionally\
      averse from what he termed \'93ructions\'94; unless angered, he\
      conformed deeply to that classic description of the she-dog,\
      \'93Er\'92d ruther run than fight.\'94 A little smile became settled in\
      his beard. Ironical that Soames should come down here\'97to this\
      house, built for himself! How he had gazed and gaped at this ruin\
      of his past intention; furtively nosing at the walls and\
      stairway, appraising everything! And intuitively Jolyon thought:\
      \'93I believe the fellow even now would like to be living here. He\
      could never leave off longing for what he once owned! Well, I\
      must act, somehow or other; but it\'92s a bore\'97a great bore.\'94\
\
      Late that evening he wrote to the Chelsea flat, asking if Irene\
      would see him.\
\
      The old century which had seen the plant of individualism flower\
      so wonderfully was setting in a sky orange with coming storms.\
      Rumours of war added to the briskness of a London turbulent at\
      the close of the summer holidays. And the streets to Jolyon, who\
      was not often up in town, had a feverish look, due to these new\
      motorcars and cabs, of which he disapproved aesthetically. He\
      counted these vehicles from his hansom, and made the proportion\
      of them one in twenty. \'93They were one in thirty about a year\
      ago,\'94 he thought; \'93they\'92ve come to stay. Just so much more\
      rattling round of wheels and general stink\'94\'97for he was one of\
      those rather rare Liberals who object to anything new when it\
      takes a material form; and he instructed his driver to get down\
      to the river quickly, out of the traffic, desiring to look at the\
      water through the mellowing screen of plane-trees. At the little\
      block of flats which stood back some fifty yards from the\
      Embankment, he told the cabman to wait, and went up to the first\
      floor.\
\
      Yes, Mrs. Heron was at home!\
\
      The effect of a settled if very modest income was at once\
      apparent to him remembering the threadbare refinement in that\
      tiny flat eight years ago when he announced her good fortune.\
      Everything was now fresh, dainty, and smelled of flowers. The\
      general effect was silvery with touches of black, hydrangea\
      colour, and gold. \'93A woman of great taste,\'94 he thought. Time had\
      dealt gently with Jolyon, for he was a Forsyte. But with Irene\
      Time hardly seemed to deal at all, or such was his impression.\
      She appeared to him not a day older, standing there in\
      mole-coloured velvet corduroy, with soft dark eyes and dark gold\
      hair, with outstretched hand and a little smile.\
\
      \'93Won\'92t you sit down?\'94\
\
      He had probably never occupied a chair with a fuller sense of\
      embarrassment.\
\
      \'93You look absolutely unchanged,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93And you look younger, Cousin Jolyon.\'94\
\
      Jolyon ran his hands through his hair, whose thickness was still\
      a comfort to him.\
\
      \'93I\'92m ancient, but I don\'92t feel it. That\'92s one thing about\
      painting, it keeps you young. Titian lived to ninety-nine, and\
      had to have plague to kill him off. Do you know, the first time I\
      ever saw you I thought of a picture by him?\'94\
\
      \'93When did you see me for the first time?\'94\
\
      \'93In the Botanical Gardens.\'94\
\
      \'93How did you know me, if you\'92d never seen me before?\'94\
\
      \'93By someone who came up to you.\'94 He was looking at her hardily,\
      but her face did not change; and she said quietly:\
\
      \'93Yes; many lives ago.\'94\
\
      \'93What is _your_ recipe for youth, Irene?\'94\
\
      \'93People who don\'92t _live_ are wonderfully preserved.\'94\
\
      H\'92m! a bitter little saying! People who don\'92t live! But an\
      opening, and he took it. \'93You remember my Cousin Soames?\'94\
\
      He saw her smile faintly at that whimsicality, and at once went\
      on:\
\
      \'93He came to see me the day before yesterday! He wants a divorce.\
      Do you?\'94\
\
      \'93I?\'94 The word seemed startled out of her. \'93After twelve years?\
      It\'92s rather late. Won\'92t it be difficult?\'94\
\
      Jolyon looked hard into her face. \'93Unless....\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93Unless I have a lover now. But I have never had one since.\'94\
\
      What did he feel at the simplicity and candour of those words?\
      Relief, surprise, pity! Venus for twelve years without a lover!\
\
      \'93And yet,\'94 he said, \'93I suppose you would give a good deal to be\
      free, too?\'94\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know. What does it matter, now?\'94\
\
      \'93But if you were to love again?\'94\
\
      \'93I should love.\'94 In that simple answer she seemed to sum up the\
      whole philosophy of one on whom the world had turned its back.\
\
      \'93Well! Is there anything you would like me to say to him?\'94\
\
      \'93Only that I\'92m sorry he\'92s not free. He had his chance once. I\
      don\'92t know why he didn\'92t take it.\'94\
\
      \'93Because he was a Forsyte; we never part with things, you know,\
      unless we want something in their place; and not always then.\'94\
\
      Irene smiled. \'93Don\'92t you, Cousin Jolyon?\'97I think you do.\'94\
\
      \'93Of course, I\'92m a bit of a mongrel\'97not quite a pure Forsyte. I\
      never take the halfpennies off my cheques, I put them on,\'94 said\
      Jolyon uneasily.\
\
      \'93Well, what does Soames want in place of me now?\'94\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know; perhaps children.\'94\
\
      She was silent for a little, looking down.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 she murmured; \'93it\'92s hard. I would help him to be free if I\
      could.\'94\
\
      Jolyon gazed into his hat, his embarrassment was increasing fast;\
      so was his admiration, his wonder, and his pity. She was so\
      lovely, and so lonely; and altogether it was such a coil!\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said, \'93I shall have to see Soames. If there\'92s anything\
      I can do for you I\'92m always at your service. You must think of me\
      as a wretched substitute for my father. At all events I\'92ll let\
      you know what happens when I speak to Soames. He may supply the\
      material himself.\'94\
\
      She shook her head.\
\
      \'93You see, he has a lot to lose; and I have nothing. I should like\
      him to be free; but I don\'92t see what I can do.\'94\
\
      \'93Nor I at the moment,\'94 said Jolyon, and soon after took his\
      leave. He went down to his hansom. Half-past three! Soames would\
      be at his office still.\
\
      \'93To the Poultry,\'94 he called through the trap. In front of the\
      Houses of Parliament and in Whitehall, newsvendors were calling,\
      \'93Grave situation in the Transvaal!\'94 but the cries hardly roused\
      him, absorbed in recollection of that very beautiful figure, of\
      her soft dark glance, and the words: \'93I have never had one\
      since.\'94 What on earth did such a woman do with her life,\
      back-watered like this? Solitary, unprotected, with every man\'92s\
      hand against her or rather\'97reaching out to grasp her at the least\
      sign. And year after year she went on like that!\
\
      The word \'93Poultry\'94 above the passing citizens brought him back to\
      reality.\
\
      \'93Forsyte, Bustard and Forsyte,\'94 in black letters on a ground the\
      colour of peasoup, spurred him to a sort of vigour, and he went\
      up the stone stairs muttering: \'93Fusty musty ownerships! Well, we\
      couldn\'92t do without them!\'94\
\
      \'93I want Mr. Soames Forsyte,\'94 he said to the boy who opened the\
      door.\
\
      \'93What name?\'94\
\
      \'93Mr. Jolyon Forsyte.\'94\
\
      The youth looked at him curiously, never having seen a Forsyte\
      with a beard, and vanished.\
\
      The offices of \'93Forsyte, Bustard and Forsyte\'94 had slowly absorbed\
      the offices of \'93Tooting and Bowles,\'94 and occupied the whole of\
      the first floor.\
\
      The firm consisted now of nothing but Soames and a number of\
      managing and articled clerks. The complete retirement of James\
      some six years ago had accelerated business, to which the final\
      touch of speed had been imparted when Bustard dropped off, worn\
      out, as many believed, by the suit of \'93Fryer _versus_ Forsyte,\'94\
      more in Chancery than ever and less likely to benefit its\
      beneficiaries. Soames, with his saner grasp of actualities, had\
      never permitted it to worry him; on the contrary, he had long\
      perceived that Providence had presented him therein with \'a3200 a\
      year net in perpetuity, and\'97why not?\
\
      When Jolyon entered, his cousin was drawing out a list of\
      holdings in Consols, which in view of the rumours of war he was\
      going to advise his companies to put on the market at once,\
      before other companies did the same. He looked round, sidelong,\
      and said:\
\
      \'93How are you? Just one minute. Sit down, won\'92t you?\'94 And having\
      entered three amounts, and set a ruler to keep his place, he\
      turned towards Jolyon, biting the side of his flat forefinger....\
\
      \'93Yes?\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93I have seen her.\'94\
\
      Soames frowned.\
\
      \'93Well?\'94\
\
      \'93She has remained faithful to memory.\'94\
\
      Having said that, Jolyon was ashamed. His cousin had flushed a\
      dusky yellowish red. What had made him tease the poor brute!\
\
      \'93I was to tell you she is sorry you are not free. Twelve years is\
      a long time. You know your law, and what chance it gives you.\'94\
      Soames uttered a curious little grunt, and the two remained a\
      full minute without speaking. \'93Like wax!\'94 thought Jolyon,\
      watching that close face, where the flush was fast subsiding.\
      \'93He\'92ll never give me a sign of what he\'92s thinking, or going to\
      do. Like wax!\'94 And he transferred his gaze to a plan of that\
      flourishing town, \'93By-Street on Sea,\'94 the future existence of\
      which lay exposed on the wall to the possessive instincts of the\
      firm\'92s clients. The whimsical thought flashed through him: \'93I\
      wonder if I shall get a bill of costs for this\'97\'91To attending Mr.\
      Jolyon Forsyte in the matter of my divorce, to receiving his\
      account of his visit to my wife, and to advising him to go and\
      see her again, sixteen and eightpence.\'92\'94\
\
      Suddenly Soames said: \'93I can\'92t go on like this. I tell you, I\
      can\'92t go on like this.\'94 His eyes were shifting from side to side,\
      like an animal\'92s when it looks for way of escape. \'93He really\
      suffers,\'94 thought Jolyon; \'93I\'92ve no business to forget that, just\
      because I don\'92t like him.\'94\
\
      \'93Surely,\'94 he said gently, \'93it lies with yourself. A man can\
      always put these things through if he\'92ll take it on himself.\'94\
\
      Soames turned square to him, with a sound which seemed to come\
      from somewhere very deep.\
\
      \'93Why should I suffer more than I\'92ve suffered already? Why should\
      I?\'94\
\
      Jolyon could only shrug his shoulders. His reason agreed, his\
      instinct rebelled; he could not have said why.\
\
      \'93Your father,\'94 went on Soames, \'93took an interest in her\'97why,\
      goodness knows! And I suppose you do too?\'94 he gave Jolyon a sharp\
      look. \'93It seems to me that one only has to do another person a\
      wrong to get all the sympathy. I don\'92t know in what way I was to\
      blame\'97I\'92ve never known. I always treated her well. I gave her\
      everything she could wish for. I wanted her.\'94\
\
      Again Jolyon\'92s reason nodded; again his instinct shook its head.\
      \'93What is it?\'94 he thought; \'93there must be something wrong in me.\
      Yet if there is, I\'92d rather be wrong than right.\'94\
\
      \'93After all,\'94 said Soames with a sort of glum fierceness, \'93she was\
      my wife.\'94\
\
      In a flash the thought went through his listener: \'93There it is!\
      Ownerships! Well, we all own things. But\'97human beings! Pah!\'94\
\
      \'93You have to look at facts,\'94 he said drily, \'93or rather the want\
      of them.\'94\
\
      Soames gave him another quick suspicious look.\
\
      \'93The want of them?\'94 he said. \'93Yes, but I am not so sure.\'94\
\
      \'93I beg your pardon,\'94 replied Jolyon; \'93I\'92ve told you what she\
      said. It was explicit.\'94\
\
      \'93My experience has not been one to promote blind confidence in\
      her word. We shall see.\'94\
\
      Jolyon got up.\
\
      \'93Good-bye,\'94 he said curtly.\
\
      \'93Good-bye,\'94 returned Soames; and Jolyon went out trying to\
      understand the look, half-startled, half-menacing, on his\
      cousin\'92s face. He sought Waterloo Station in a disturbed frame of\
      mind, as though the skin of his moral being had been scraped; and\
      all the way down in the train he thought of Irene in her lonely\
      flat, and of Soames in his lonely office, and of the strange\
      paralysis of life that lay on them both. \'93In chancery!\'94 he\
      thought. \'93Both their necks in chancery\'97and her\'92s so pretty!\'94\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER IX VAL HEARS THE NEWS\
\
\
      The keeping of engagements had not as yet been a conspicuous\
      feature in the life of young Val Dartie, so that when he broke\
      two and kept one, it was the latter event which caused him, if\
      anything, the greater surprise, while jogging back to town from\
      Robin Hill after his ride with Holly. She had been even prettier\
      than he had thought her yesterday, on her silver-roan,\
      long-tailed \'93palfrey\'94. and it seemed to him, self-critical in the\
      brumous October gloaming and the outskirts of London, that only\
      his boots had shone throughout their two-hour companionship. He\
      took out his new gold \'93hunter\'94\'97present from James\'97and looked not\
      at the time, but at sections of his face in the glittering back\
      of its opened case. He had a temporary spot over one eyebrow, and\
      it displeased him, for it must have displeased her. Crum never\
      had any spots. Together with Crum rose the scene in the promenade\
      of the Pandemonium. To-day he had not had the faintest desire to\
      unbosom himself to Holly about his father. His father lacked\
      poetry, the stirrings of which he was feeling for the first time\
      in his nineteen years. The Liberty, with Cynthia Dark, that\
      almost mythical embodiment of rapture; the Pandemonium, with the\
      woman of uncertain age\'97both seemed to Val completely \'93off,\'94 fresh\
      from communion with this new, shy, dark-haired young cousin of\
      his. She rode \'93Jolly well,\'94 too, so that it had been all the more\
      flattering that she had let him lead her where he would in the\
      long gallops of Richmond Park, though she knew them so much\
      better than he did. Looking back on it all, he was mystified by\
      the barrenness of his speech; he felt that he could say \'93an awful\
      lot of fetching things\'94 if he had but the chance again, and the\
      thought that he must go back to Littlehampton on the morrow, and\
      to Oxford on the twelfth\'97\'93to that beastly exam,\'94 too\'97without the\
      faintest chance of first seeing her again, caused darkness to\
      settle on his spirit even more quickly than on the evening. He\
      should write to her, however, and she had promised to answer.\
      Perhaps, too, she would come up to Oxford to see her brother.\
      That thought was like the first star, which came out as he rode\
      into Padwick\'92s livery stables in the purlieus of Sloane Square.\
      He got off and stretched himself luxuriously, for he had ridden\
      some twenty-five good miles. The Dartie within him made him\
      chaffer for five minutes with young Padwick concerning the\
      favourite for the Cambridgeshire; then with the words, \'93Put the\
      gee down to my account,\'94 he walked away, a little wide at the\
      knees, and flipping his boots with his knotty little cane. \'93I\
      don\'92t feel a bit inclined to go out,\'94 he thought. \'93I wonder if\
      mother will stand fizz for my last night!\'94 With \'93fizz\'94 and\
      recollection, he could well pass a domestic evening.\
\
      When he came down, speckless after his bath, he found his mother\
      scrupulous in a low evening dress, and, to his annoyance, his\
      Uncle Soames. They stopped talking when he came in; then his\
      uncle said:\
\
      \'93He\'92d better be told.\'94\
\
      At those words, which meant something about his father, of\
      course, Val\'92s first thought was of Holly. Was it anything\
      beastly? His mother began speaking.\
\
      \'93Your father,\'94 she said in her fashionably appointed voice, while\
      her fingers plucked rather pitifully at sea-green brocade, \'93your\
      father, my dear boy, has\'97is not at Newmarket; he\'92s on his way to\
      South America. He\'97he\'92s left us.\'94\
\
      Val looked from her to Soames. Left them! Was he sorry? Was he\
      fond of his father? It seemed to him that he did not know. Then,\
      suddenly\'97as at a whiff of gardenias and cigars\'97his heart twitched\
      within him, and he _was_ sorry. One\'92s father belonged to one,\
      could not go off in this fashion\'97it was not done! Nor had he\
      always been the \'93bounder\'94 of the Pandemonium promenade. There\
      were precious memories of tailors\'92 shops and horses, tips at\
      school, and general lavish kindness, when in luck.\
\
      \'93But why?\'94 he said. Then, as a sportsman himself, was sorry he\
      had asked. The mask of his mother\'92s face was all disturbed; and\
      he burst out:\
\
      \'93All right, Mother, don\'92t tell me! Only, what does it mean?\'94\
\
      \'93A divorce, Val, I\'92m afraid.\'94\
\
      Val uttered a queer little grunt, and looked quickly at his\
      uncle\'97that uncle whom he had been taught to look on as a\
      guarantee against the consequences of having a father, even\
      against the Dartie blood in his own veins. The flat-checked\
      visage seemed to wince, and this upset him.\
\
      \'93It won\'92t be public, will it?\'94\
\
      So vividly before him had come recollection of his own eyes glued\
      to the unsavoury details of many a divorce suit in the Public\
      Press.\
\
      \'93Can\'92t it be done quietly somehow? It\'92s so disgusting for\'97for\
      mother, and\'97and everybody.\'94\
\
      \'93Everything will be done as quietly as it can, you may be sure.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes\'97but, why is it necessary at all? Mother doesn\'92t want to\
      marry again.\'94\
\
      Himself, the girls, their name tarnished in the sight of his\
      schoolfellows and of Crum, of the men at Oxford, of\'97Holly!\
      Unbearable! What was to be gained by it?\
\
      \'93Do you, Mother?\'94 he said sharply.\
\
      Thus brought face to face with so much of her own feeling by the\
      one she loved best in the world, Winifred rose from the Empire\
      chair in which she had been sitting. She saw that her son would\
      be against her unless he was told everything; and, yet, how could\
      she tell him? Thus, still plucking at the green brocade, she\
      stared at Soames. Val, too, stared at Soames. Surely this\
      embodiment of respectability and the sense of property could not\
      wish to bring such a slur on his own sister!\
\
      Soames slowly passed a little inlaid paperknife over the smooth\
      surface of a marqueterie table; then, without looking at his\
      nephew, he began:\
\
      \'93You don\'92t understand what your mother has had to put up with\
      these twenty years. This is only the last straw, Val.\'94 And\
      glancing up sideways at Winifred, he added:\
\
      \'93Shall I tell him?\'94\
\
      Winifred was silent. If he were not told, he would be against\
      her! Yet, how dreadful to be told such things of his own father!\
      Clenching her lips, she nodded.\
\
      Soames spoke in a rapid, even voice:\
\
      \'93He has always been a burden round your mother\'92s neck. She has\
      paid his debts over and over again; he has often been drunk,\
      abused and threatened her; and now he is gone to Buenos Aires\
      with a dancer.\'94 And, as if distrusting the efficacy of those\
      words on the boy, he went on quickly:\
\
      \'93He took your mother\'92s pearls to give to her.\'94\
\
      Val jerked up his hand, then. At that signal of distress Winifred\
      cried out:\
\
      \'93That\'92ll do, Soames\'97stop!\'94\
\
      In the boy, the Dartie and the Forsyte were struggling. For\
      debts, drink, dancers, he had a certain sympathy; but the\
      pearls\'97no! That was too much! And suddenly he found his mother\'92s\
      hand squeezing his.\
\
      \'93You see,\'94 he heard Soames say, \'93we can\'92t have it all begin over\
      again. There\'92s a limit; we must strike while the iron\'92s hot.\'94\
\
      Val freed his hand.\
\
      \'93But\'97you\'92re\'97never going to bring out that about the pearls! I\
      couldn\'92t stand that\'97I simply couldn\'92t!\'94\
\
      Winifred cried out:\
\
      \'93No, no, Val\'97oh no! That\'92s only to show you how impossible your\
      father is!\'94 And his uncle nodded. Somewhat assuaged, Val took out\
      a cigarette. His father had bought him that thin curved case. Oh!\
      it was unbearable\'97just as he was going up to Oxford!\
\
      \'93Can\'92t mother be protected without?\'94 he said. \'93I could look after\
      her. It could always be done later if it was really necessary.\'94\
\
      A smile played for a moment round Soames\'92 lips, and became\
      bitter.\
\
      \'93You don\'92t know what you\'92re talking of; nothing\'92s so fatal as\
      delay in such matters.\'94\
\
      \'93Why?\'94\
\
      \'93I tell you, boy, nothing\'92s so fatal. I know from experience.\'94\
\
      His voice had the ring of exasperation. Val regarded him\
      round-eyed, never having known his uncle express any sort of\
      feeling. Oh! Yes\'97he remembered now\'97there had been an Aunt Irene,\
      and something had happened\'97something which people kept dark; he\
      had heard his father once use an unmentionable word of her.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t want to speak ill of your father,\'94 Soames went on\
      doggedly, \'93but I know him well enough to be sure that he\'92ll be\
      back on your mother\'92s hands before a year\'92s over. You can imagine\
      what that will mean to her and to all of you after this. The only\
      thing is to cut the knot for good.\'94\
\
      In spite of himself, Val was impressed; and, happening to look at\
      his mother\'92s face, he got what was perhaps his first real insight\
      into the fact that his own feelings were not always what mattered\
      most.\
\
      \'93All right, mother,\'94 he said; \'93we\'92ll back you up. Only I\'92d like\
      to know when it\'92ll be. It\'92s my first term, you know. I don\'92t want\
      to be up there when it comes off.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! my dear boy,\'94 murmured Winifred, \'93it _is_ a bore for you.\'94\
      So, by habit, she phrased what, from the expression of her face,\
      was the most poignant regret. \'93When will it be, Soames?\'94\
\
      \'93Can\'92t tell\'97not for months. We must get restitution first.\'94\
\
      \'93What the deuce is that?\'94 thought Val. \'93What silly brutes lawyers\
      are! Not for months! I know one thing: I\'92m not going to dine in!\'94\
      And he said:\
\
      \'93Awfully sorry, mother, I\'92ve got to go out to dinner now.\'94\
\
      Though it was his last night, Winifred nodded almost gratefully;\
      they both felt that they had gone quite far enough in the\
      expression of feeling.\
\
      Val sought the misty freedom of Green Street, reckless and\
      depressed. And not till he reached Piccadilly did he discover\
      that he had only eighteen-pence. One couldn\'92t dine off\
      eighteen-pence, and he was very hungry. He looked longingly at\
      the windows of the Iseeum Club, where he had often eaten of the\
      best with his father! Those pearls! There was no getting over\
      them! But the more he brooded and the further he walked the\
      hungrier he naturally became. Short of trailing home, there were\
      only two places where he could go\'97his grandfather\'92s in Park Lane,\
      and Timothy\'92s in the Bayswater Road. Which was the less\
      deplorable? At his grandfather\'92s he would probably get a better\
      dinner on the spur of the moment. At Timothy\'92s they gave you a\
      jolly good feed when they expected you, not otherwise. He decided\
      on Park Lane, not unmoved by the thought that to go up to Oxford\
      without affording his grandfather a chance to tip him was hardly\
      fair to either of them. His mother would hear he had been there,\
      of course, and might think it funny; but he couldn\'92t help that.\
      He rang the bell.\
\
      \'93Hullo, Warmson, any dinner for me, d\'92you think?\'94\
\
      \'93They\'92re just going in, Master Val. Mr. Forsyte will be very glad\
      to see you. He was saying at lunch that he never saw you\
      nowadays.\'94\
\
      Val grinned.\
\
      \'93Well, here I am. Kill the fatted calf, Warmson, let\'92s have\
      fizz.\'94\
\
      Warmson smiled faintly\'97in his opinion Val was a young limb.\
\
      \'93I will ask Mrs. Forsyte, Master Val.\'94\
\
      \'93I say,\'94 Val grumbled, taking off his overcoat, \'93I\'92m not at\
      school any more, you know.\'94\
\
      Warmson, not without a sense of humour, opened the door beyond\
      the stag\'92s-horn coat stand, with the words:\
\
      \'93Mr. Valerus, ma\'92am.\'94\
\
      \'93Confound him!\'94 thought Val, entering.\
\
      A warm embrace, a \'93Well, Val!\'94 from Emily, and a rather quavery\
      \'93So there you are at last!\'94 from James, restored his sense of\
      dignity.\
\
      \'93Why didn\'92t you let us know? There\'92s only saddle of mutton.\
      Champagne, Warmson,\'94 said Emily. And they went in.\
\
      At the great dining-table, shortened to its utmost, under which\
      so many fashionable legs had rested, James sat at one end, Emily\
      at the other, Val half-way between them; and something of the\
      loneliness of his grandparents, now that all their four children\
      were flown, reached the boy\'92s spirit. \'93I hope I shall kick the\
      bucket long before I\'92m as old as grandfather,\'94 he thought. \'93Poor\
      old chap, he\'92s as thin as a rail!\'94 And lowering his voice while\
      his grandfather and Warmson were in discussion about sugar in the\
      soup, he said to Emily:\
\
      \'93It\'92s pretty brutal at home, Granny. I suppose you know.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, dear boy.\'94\
\
      \'93Uncle Soames was there when I left. I say, isn\'92t there anything\
      to be done to prevent a divorce? Why is he so beastly keen on\
      it?\'94\
\
      \'93Hush, my dear!\'94 murmured Emily; \'93we\'92re keeping it from your\
      grandfather.\'94\
\
      James\'92 voice sounded from the other end.\
\
      \'93What\'92s that? What are you talking about?\'94\
\
      \'93About Val\'92s college,\'94 returned Emily. \'93Young Pariser was there,\
      James; you remember\'97he nearly broke the Bank at Monte Carlo\
      afterwards.\'94\
\
      James muttered that he did not know\'97Val must look after himself\
      up there, or he\'92d get into bad ways. And he looked at his\
      grandson with gloom, out of which affection distrustfully\
      glimmered.\
\
      \'93What I\'92m afraid of,\'94 said Val to his plate, \'93is of being hard\
      up, you know.\'94\
\
      By instinct he knew that the weak spot in that old man was fear\
      of insecurity for his grandchildren.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said James, and the soup in his spoon dribbled over,\
      \'93you\'92ll have a good allowance; but you must keep within it.\'94\
\
      \'93Of course,\'94 murmured Val; \'93if it is good. How much will it be,\
      Grandfather?\'94\
\
      \'93Three hundred and fifty; it\'92s too much. I had next to nothing at\
      your age.\'94\
\
      Val sighed. He had hoped for four, and been afraid of three. \'93I\
      don\'92t know what your young cousin has,\'94 said James; \'93he\'92s up\
      there. His father\'92s a rich man.\'94\
\
      \'93Aren\'92t you?\'94 asked Val hardily.\
\
      \'93I?\'94 replied James, flustered. \'93I\'92ve got so many expenses. Your\
      father....\'94 and he was silent.\
\
      \'93Cousin Jolyon\'92s got an awfully jolly place. I went down there\
      with Uncle Soames\'97ripping stables.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 murmured James profoundly. \'93That house\'97I knew how it would\
      be!\'94 And he lapsed into gloomy meditation over his fish-bones.\
      His son\'92s tragedy, and the deep cleavage it had caused in the\
      Forsyte family, had still the power to draw him down into a\
      whirlpool of doubts and misgivings. Val, who hankered to talk of\
      Robin Hill, because Robin Hill meant Holly, turned to Emily and\
      said:\
\
      \'93Was that the house built for Uncle Soames?\'94 And, receiving her\
      nod, went on: \'93I wish you\'92d tell me about him, Granny. What\
      became of Aunt Irene? Is she still going? He seems awfully\
      worked-up about something to-night.\'94\
\
      Emily laid her finger on her lips, but the word Irene had caught\
      James\'92 ear.\
\
      \'93What\'92s that?\'94 he said, staying a piece of mutton close to his\
      lips. \'93Who\'92s been seeing her? I knew we hadn\'92t heard the last of\
      that.\'94\
\
      \'93Now, James,\'94 said Emily, \'93eat your dinner. Nobody\'92s been seeing\
      anybody.\'94\
\
      James put down his fork.\
\
      \'93There you go,\'94 he said. \'93I might die before you\'92d tell me of it.\
      Is Soames getting a divorce?\'94\
\
      \'93Nonsense,\'94 said Emily with incomparable aplomb; \'93Soames is much\
      too sensible.\'94\
\
      James had sought his own throat, gathering the long white\
      whiskers together on the skin and bone of it.\
\
      \'93She\'97she was always....\'94 he said, and with that enigmatic remark\
      the conversation lapsed, for Warmson had returned. But later,\
      when the saddle of mutton had been succeeded by sweet, savoury,\
      and dessert, and Val had received a cheque for twenty pounds and\
      his grandfather\'92s kiss\'97like no other kiss in the world, from lips\
      pushed out with a sort of fearful suddenness, as if yielding to\
      weakness\'97he returned to the charge in the hall.\
\
      \'93Tell us about Uncle Soames, Granny. Why is he so keen on\
      mother\'92s getting a divorce?\'94\
\
      \'93Your Uncle Soames,\'94 said Emily, and her voice had in it an\
      exaggerated assurance, \'93is a lawyer, my dear boy. He\'92s sure to\
      know best.\'94\
\
      \'93Is he?\'94 muttered Val. \'93But what did become of Aunt Irene? I\
      remember she was jolly good-looking.\'94\
\
      \'93She\'97er....\'94 said Emily, \'93behaved very badly. We don\'92t talk about\
      it.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, I don\'92t want everybody at Oxford to know about our\
      affairs,\'94 ejaculated Val; \'93it\'92s a brutal idea. Why couldn\'92t\
      father be prevented without its being made public?\'94\
\
      Emily sighed. She had always lived rather in an atmosphere of\
      divorce, owing to her fashionable proclivities\'97so many of those\
      whose legs had been under her table having gained a certain\
      notoriety. When, however, it touched her own family, she liked it\
      no better than other people. But she was eminently practical, and\
      a woman of courage, who never pursued a shadow in preference to\
      its substance.\
\
      \'93Your mother,\'94 she said, \'93will be happier if she\'92s quite free,\
      Val. Good-night, my dear boy; and don\'92t wear loud waistcoats up\
      at Oxford, they\'92re not the thing just now. Here\'92s a little\
      present.\'94\
\
      With another five pounds in his hand, and a little warmth in his\
      heart, for he was fond of his grandmother, he went out into Park\
      Lane. A wind had cleared the mist, the autumn leaves were\
      rustling, and the stars were shining. With all that money in his\
      pocket an impulse to \'93see life\'94 beset him; but he had not gone\
      forty yards in the direction of Piccadilly when Holly\'92s shy face,\
      and her eyes with an imp dancing in their gravity, came up before\
      him, and his hand seemed to be tingling again from the pressure\
      of her warm gloved hand. \'93No, dash it!\'94 he thought, \'93I\'92m going\
      home!\'94\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER X SOAMES ENTERTAINS THE FUTURE\
\
\
      It was full late for the river, but the weather was lovely, and\
      summer lingered below the yellowing leaves. Soames took many\
      looks at the day from his riverside garden near Mapledurham that\
      Sunday morning.\
\
      With his own hands he put flowers about his little house-boat,\
      and equipped the punt, in which, after lunch, he proposed to take\
      them on the river. Placing those Chinese-looking cushions, he\
      could not tell whether or no he wished to take Annette alone. She\
      was so very pretty\'97could he trust himself not to say irrevocable\
      words, passing beyond the limits of discretion? Roses on the\
      veranda were still in bloom, and the hedges ever-green, so that\
      there was almost nothing of middle-aged autumn to chill the mood;\
      yet was he nervous, fidgety, strangely distrustful of his powers\
      to steer just the right course. This visit had been planned to\
      produce in Annette and her mother a due sense of his possessions,\
      so that they should be ready to receive with respect any overture\
      he might later be disposed to make. He dressed with great care,\
      making himself neither too young nor too old, very thankful that\
      his hair was still thick and smooth and had no grey in it. Three\
      times he went up to his picture-gallery. If they had any\
      knowledge at all, they must see at once that his collection alone\
      was worth at least thirty thousand pounds. He minutely inspected,\
      too, the pretty bedroom overlooking the river where they would\
      take off their hats. It would be her bedroom if\'97if the matter\
      went through, and she became his wife. Going up to the\
      dressing-table he passed his hand over the lilac-coloured\
      pincushion, into which were stuck all kinds of pins; a bowl of\
      pot-pourri exhaled a scent that made his head turn just a little.\
      His wife! If only the whole thing could be settled out of hand,\
      and there was not the nightmare of this divorce to be gone\
      through first; and with gloom puckered on his forehead, he looked\
      out at the river shining beyond the roses and the lawn. Madame\
      Lamotte would never resist this prospect for her child; Annette\
      would never resist her mother. If only he were free! He drove to\
      the station to meet them. What taste Frenchwomen had! Madame\
      Lamotte was in black with touches of lilac colour, Annette in\
      greyish lilac linen, with cream coloured gloves and hat. Rather\
      pale she looked and Londony; and her blue eyes were demure.\
      Waiting for them to come down to lunch, Soames stood in the open\
      french-window of the diningroom moved by that sensuous delight in\
      sunshine and flowers and trees which only came to the full when\
      youth and beauty were there to share it with one. He had ordered\
      the lunch with intense consideration; the wine was a very special\
      Sauterne, the whole appointments of the meal perfect, the coffee\
      served on the veranda super-excellent. Madame Lamotte accepted\
      creme de menthe; Annette refused. Her manners were charming, with\
      just a suspicion of \'93the conscious beauty\'94 creeping into them.\
      \'93Yes,\'94 thought Soames, \'93another year of London and that sort of\
      life, and she\'92ll be spoiled.\'94\
\
      Madame was in sedate French raptures. \'93_Adorable! Le soleil est\
      si bon!_ How everything is _chic_, is it not, Annette? Monsieur\
      is a real Monte Cristo.\'94 Annette murmured assent, with a look up\
      at Soames which he could not read. He proposed a turn on the\
      river. But to punt two persons when one of them looked so\
      ravishing on those Chinese cushions was merely to suffer from a\
      sense of lost opportunity; so they went but a short way towards\
      Pangbourne, drifting slowly back, with every now and then an\
      autumn leaf dropping on Annette or on her mother\'92s black\
      amplitude. And Soames was not happy, worried by the thought:\
      \'93How\'97when\'97where\'97can I say\'97what?\'94 They did not yet even know that\
      he was married. To tell them he was married might jeopardise his\
      every chance; yet, if he did not definitely make them understand\
      that he wished for Annette\'92s hand, it would be dropping into some\
      other clutch before he was free to claim it.\
\
      At tea, which they both took with lemon, Soames spoke of the\
      Transvaal.\
\
      \'93There\'92ll be war,\'94 he said.\
\
      Madame Lamotte lamented.\
\
      \'93_Ces pauvres gens bergers!_\'94 Could they not be left to\
      themselves?\
\
      Soames smiled\'97the question seemed to him absurd.\
\
      Surely as a woman of business she understood that the British\
      could not abandon their legitimate commercial interests.\
\
      \'93Ah! that!\'94 But Madame Lamotte found that the English were a\
      little hypocrite. They were talking of justice and the\
      Uitlanders, not of business. Monsieur was the first who had\
      spoken to her of that.\
\
      \'93The Boers are only half-civilised,\'94 remarked Soames; \'93they stand\
      in the way of progress. It will never do to let our suzerainty\
      go.\'94\
\
      \'93What does that mean to say? Suzerainty!\'94\
\
      \'93What a strange word!\'94 Soames became eloquent, roused by these\
      threats to the principle of possession, and stimulated by\
      Annette\'92s eyes fixed on him. He was delighted when presently she\
      said:\
\
      \'93I think Monsieur is right. They should be taught a lesson.\'94 She\
      was sensible!\
\
      \'93Of course,\'94 he said, \'93we must act with moderation. I\'92m no jingo.\
      We must be firm without bullying. Will you come up and see my\
      pictures?\'94 Moving from one to another of these treasures, he soon\
      perceived that they knew nothing. They passed his last Mauve,\
      that remarkable study of a \'93Hay-cart going Home,\'94 as if it were a\
      lithograph. He waited almost with awe to see how they would view\
      the jewel of his collection\'97an Israels whose price he had watched\
      ascending till he was now almost certain it had reached top\
      value, and would be better on the market again. They did not view\
      it at all. This was a shock; and yet to have in Annette a virgin\
      taste to form would be better than to have the silly, half-baked\
      predilections of the English middle-class to deal with. At the\
      end of the gallery was a Meissonier of which he was rather\
      ashamed\'97Meissonier was so steadily going down. Madame Lamotte\
      stopped before it.\
\
      \'93Meissonier! Ah! What a jewel!\'94 Soames took advantage of that\
      moment. Very gently touching Annette\'92s arm, he said:\
\
      \'93How do you like my place, Annette?\'94\
\
      She did not shrink, did not respond; she looked at him full,\
      looked down, and murmured:\
\
      \'93Who would not like it? It is so beautiful!\'94\
\
      \'93Perhaps some day\'97\'94 Soames said, and stopped.\
\
      So pretty she was, so self-possessed\'97she frightened him. Those\
      cornflower-blue eyes, the turn of that creamy neck, her delicate\
      curves\'97she was a standing temptation to indiscretion! No! No! One\
      must be sure of one\'92s ground\'97much surer! \'93If I hold off,\'94 he\
      thought, \'93it will tantalise her.\'94 And he crossed over to Madame\
      Lamotte, who was still in front of the Meissonier.\
\
      \'93Yes, that\'92s quite a good example of his later work. You must\
      come again, Madame, and see them lighted up. You must both come\
      and spend a night.\'94\
\
      Enchanted, would it not be beautiful to see them lighted? By\
      moonlight too, the river must be ravishing!\
\
      Annette murmured:\
\
      \'93Thou art sentimental, _Maman!_\'94\
\
      Sentimental! That black-robed, comely, substantial Frenchwoman of\
      the world! And suddenly he was certain as he could be that there\
      was no sentiment in either of them. All the better. Of what use\
      sentiment? And yet...!\
\
      He drove to the station with them, and saw them into the train.\
      To the tightened pressure of his hand it seemed that Annette\'92s\
      fingers responded just a little; her face smiled at him through\
      the dark.\
\
      He went back to the carriage, brooding. \'93Go on home, Jordan,\'94 he\
      said to the coachman; \'93I\'92ll walk.\'94 And he strode out into the\
      darkening lanes, caution and the desire of possession playing\
      see-saw within him. \'93_Bon soir, monsieur!_\'94 How softly she had\
      said it. To know what was in her mind! The French\'97they were like\
      cats\'97one could tell nothing! But\'97how pretty! What a perfect young\
      thing to hold in one\'92s arms! What a mother for his heir! And he\
      thought, with a smile, of his family and their surprise at a\
      French wife, and their curiosity, and of the way he would play\
      with it and buffet it confound them!\
\
      The poplars sighed in the darkness; an owl hooted. Shadows\
      deepened in the water. \'93I will and must be free,\'94 he thought. \'93I\
      won\'92t hang about any longer. I\'92ll go and see Irene. If you want\
      things done, do them yourself. I must live again\'97live and move\
      and have my being.\'94 And in echo to that queer biblicality\
      church-bells chimed the call to evening prayer.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER XI AND VISITS THE PAST\
\
\
      On a Tuesday evening after dining at his club Soames set out to\
      do what required more courage and perhaps less delicacy than\
      anything he had yet undertaken in his life\'97save perhaps his\
      birth, and one other action. He chose the evening, indeed, partly\
      because Irene was more likely to be in, but mainly because he had\
      failed to find sufficient resolution by daylight, had needed wine\
      to give him extra daring.\
\
      He left his hansom on the Embankment, and walked up to the Old\
      Church, uncertain of the block of flats where he knew she lived.\
      He found it hiding behind a much larger mansion; and having read\
      the name, \'93Mrs. Irene Heron\'94\'97Heron, forsooth! Her maiden name: so\
      she used that again, did she?\'97he stepped back into the road to\
      look up at the windows of the first floor. Light was coming\
      through in the corner flat, and he could hear a piano being\
      played. He had never had a love of music, had secretly borne it a\
      grudge in the old days when so often she had turned to her piano,\
      making of it a refuge place into which she knew he could not\
      enter. Repulse! The long repulse, at first restrained and secret,\
      at last open! Bitter memory came with that sound. It must be she\
      playing, and thus almost assured of seeing her, he stood more\
      undecided than ever. Shivers of anticipation ran through him; his\
      tongue felt dry, his heart beat fast. \'93_I_ have no cause to be\
      afraid,\'94 he thought. And then the lawyer stirred within him. Was\
      he doing a foolish thing? Ought he not to have arranged a formal\
      meeting in the presence of her trustee? No! Not before that\
      fellow Jolyon, who sympathised with her! Never! He crossed back\
      into the doorway, and, slowly, to keep down the beating of his\
      heart, mounted the single flight of stairs and rang the bell.\
      When the door was opened to him his sensations were regulated by\
      the scent which came\'97that perfume\'97from away back in the past,\
      bringing muffled remembrance: fragrance of a drawing-room he used\
      to enter, of a house he used to own\'97perfume of dried rose-leaves\
      and honey!\
\
      \'93Say, Mr. Forsyte,\'94 he said, \'93your mistress will see me, I know.\'94\
      He had thought this out; she would think it was Jolyon!\
\
      When the maid was gone and he was alone in the tiny hall, where\
      the light was dim from one pearly-shaded sconce, and walls,\
      carpet, everything was silvery, making the walled-in space all\
      ghostly, he could only think ridiculously: \'93Shall I go in with my\
      overcoat on, or take it off?\'94 The music ceased; the maid said\
      from the doorway:\
\
      \'93Will you walk in, sir?\'94\
\
      Soames walked in. He noted mechanically that all was still\
      silvery, and that the upright piano was of satinwood. She had\
      risen and stood recoiled against it; her hand, placed on the keys\
      as if groping for support, had struck a sudden discord, held for\
      a moment, and released. The light from the shaded piano-candle\
      fell on her neck, leaving her face rather in shadow. She was in a\
      black evening dress, with a sort of mantilla over her\
      shoulders\'97he did not remember ever having seen her in black, and\
      the thought passed through him: \'93She dresses even when she\'92s\
      alone.\'94\
\
      \'93You!\'94 he heard her whisper.\
\
      Many times Soames had rehearsed this scene in fancy. Rehearsal\
      served him not at all. He simply could not speak. He had never\
      thought that the sight of this woman whom he had once so\
      passionately desired, so completely owned, and whom he had not\
      seen for twelve years, could affect him in this way. He had\
      imagined himself speaking and acting, half as man of business,\
      half as judge. And now it was as if he were in the presence not\
      of a mere woman and erring wife, but of some force, subtle and\
      elusive as atmosphere itself within him and outside. A kind of\
      defensive irony welled up in him.\
\
      \'93Yes, it\'92s a queer visit! I hope you\'92re well.\'94\
\
      \'93Thank you. Will you sit down?\'94\
\
      She had moved away from the piano, and gone over to a\
      window-seat, sinking on to it, with her hands clasped in her lap.\
      Light fell on her there, so that Soames could see her face, eyes,\
      hair, strangely as he remembered them, strangely beautiful.\
\
      He sat down on the edge of a satinwood chair, upholstered with\
      silver-coloured stuff, close to where he was standing.\
\
      \'93You have not changed,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93No? What have you come for?\'94\
\
      \'93To discuss things.\'94\
\
      \'93I have heard what you want from your cousin.\'94\
\
      \'93Well?\'94\
\
      \'93I am willing. I have always been.\'94\
\
      The sound of her voice, reserved and close, the sight of her\
      figure watchfully poised, defensive, was helping him now. A\
      thousand memories of her, ever on the watch against him, stirred,\
      and....\
\
      \'93Perhaps you will be good enough, then, to give me information on\
      which I can act. The law must be complied with.\'94\
\
      \'93I have none to give you that you don\'92t know of.\'94\
\
      \'93Twelve years! Do you suppose I can believe that?\'94\
\
      \'93I don\'92t suppose you will believe anything I say; but it\'92s the\
      truth.\'94\
\
      Soames looked at her hard. He had said that she had not changed;\
      now he perceived that she had. Not in face, except that it was\
      more beautiful; not in form, except that it was a little\
      fuller\'97no! She had changed spiritually. There was more of her, as\
      it were, something of activity and daring, where there had been\
      sheer passive resistance. \'93Ah!\'94 he thought, \'93that\'92s her\
      independent income! Confound Uncle Jolyon!\'94\
\
      \'93I suppose you\'92re comfortably off now?\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93Thank you, yes.\'94\
\
      \'93Why didn\'92t you let me provide for you? I would have, in spite of\
      everything.\'94\
\
      A faint smile came on her lips; but she did not answer.\
\
      \'93You are still my wife,\'94 said Soames. Why he said that, what he\
      meant by it, he knew neither when he spoke nor after. It was a\
      truism almost preposterous, but its effect was startling. She\
      rose from the window-seat, and stood for a moment perfectly\
      still, looking at him. He could see her bosom heaving. Then she\
      turned to the window and threw it open.\
\
      \'93Why do that?\'94 he said sharply. \'93You\'92ll catch cold in that dress.\
      I\'92m not dangerous.\'94 And he uttered a little sad laugh.\
\
      She echoed it\'97faintly, bitterly.\
\
      \'93It was\'97habit.\'94\
\
      \'93Rather odd habit,\'94 said Soames as bitterly. \'93Shut the window!\'94\
\
      She shut it and sat down again. She had developed power, this\
      woman\'97this\'97wife of his! He felt it issuing from her as she sat\
      there, in a sort of armour. And almost unconsciously he rose and\
      moved nearer; he wanted to see the expression on her face. Her\
      eyes met his unflinching. Heavens! how clear they were, and what\
      a dark brown against that white skin, and that burnt-amber hair!\
      And how white her shoulders.\
\
      Funny sensation this! He ought to hate her.\
\
      \'93You had better tell me,\'94 he said; \'93it\'92s to your advantage to be\
      free as well as to mine. That old matter is too old.\'94\
\
      \'93I _have_ told you.\'94\
\
      \'93Do you mean to tell me there has been nothing\'97nobody?\'94\
\
      \'93Nobody. You must go to your own life.\'94\
\
      Stung by that retort, Soames moved towards the piano and back to\
      the hearth, to and fro, as he had been wont in the old days in\
      their drawing-room when his feelings were too much for him.\
\
      \'93That won\'92t do,\'94 he said. \'93You deserted me. In common justice\
      it\'92s for you....\'94\
\
      He saw her shrug those white shoulders, heard her murmur:\
\
      \'93Yes. Why didn\'92t you divorce me then? Should I have cared?\'94\
\
      He stopped, and looked at her intently with a sort of curiosity.\
      What on earth did she do with herself, if she really lived quite\
      alone? And why had he not divorced her? The old feeling that she\
      had never understood him, never done him justice, bit him while\
      he stared at her.\
\
      \'93Why couldn\'92t you have made me a good wife?\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93Yes; it was a crime to marry you. I have paid for it. You will\
      find some way perhaps. You needn\'92t mind my name, I have none to\
      lose. Now I think you had better go.\'94\
\
      A sense of defeat\'97of being defrauded of his self-justification,\
      and of something else beyond power of explanation to himself,\
      beset Soames like the breath of a cold fog. Mechanically he\
      reached up, took from the mantel-shelf a little china bowl,\
      reversed it, and said:\
\
      \'93Lowestoft. Where did you get this? I bought its fellow at\
      Jobson\'92s.\'94 And, visited by the sudden memory of how, those many\
      years ago, he and she had bought china together, he remained\
      staring at the little bowl, as if it contained all the past. Her\
      voice roused him.\
\
      \'93Take it. I don\'92t want it.\'94\
\
      Soames put it back on the shelf.\
\
      \'93Will you shake hands?\'94 he said.\
\
      A faint smile curved her lips. She held out her hand. It was cold\
      to his rather feverish touch. \'93She\'92s made of ice,\'94 he\
      thought\'97\'93she was always made of ice!\'94 But even as that thought\
      darted through him, his senses were assailed by the perfume of\
      her dress and body, as though the warmth within her, which had\
      never been for him, were struggling to show its presence. And he\
      turned on his heel. He walked out and away, as if someone with a\
      whip were after him, not even looking for a cab, glad of the\
      empty Embankment and the cold river, and the thick-strewn shadows\
      of the plane-tree leaves\'97confused, flurried, sore at heart, and\
      vaguely disturbed, as though he had made some deep mistake whose\
      consequences he could not foresee. And the fantastic thought\
      suddenly assailed him if instead of, \'93I think you had better go,\'94\
      she had said, \'93I think you had better stay!\'94 What should he have\
      felt, what would he have done? That cursed attraction of her was\
      there for him even now, after all these years of estrangement and\
      bitter thoughts. It was there, ready to mount to his head at a\
      sign, a touch. \'93I was a fool to go!\'94 he muttered. \'93I\'92ve advanced\
      nothing. Who could imagine? I never thought!\'94 Memory, flown back\
      to the first years of his marriage, played him torturing tricks.\
      She had not deserved to keep her beauty\'97the beauty he had owned\
      and known so well. And a kind of bitterness at the tenacity of\
      his own admiration welled up in him. Most men would have hated\
      the sight of her, as she had deserved. She had spoiled his life,\
      wounded his pride to death, defrauded him of a son. And yet the\
      mere sight of her, cold and resisting as ever, had this power to\
      upset him utterly! It was some damned magnetism she had! And no\
      wonder if, as she asserted; she had lived untouched these last\
      twelve years. So Bosinney\'97cursed be his memory!\'97had lived on all\
      this time with her! Soames could not tell whether he was glad of\
      that knowledge or no.\
\
      Nearing his Club at last he stopped to buy a paper. A headline\
      ran: \'93Boers reported to repudiate suzerainty!\'94 Suzerainty! \'93Just\
      like her!\'94 he thought: \'93she always did. Suzerainty! I still have\
      it by rights. She must be awfully lonely in that wretched little\
      flat!\'94\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER XII ON FORSYTE \'92CHANGE\
\
\
      Soames belonged to two clubs, \'93The Connoisseurs,\'94 which he put on\
      his cards and seldom visited, and \'93The Remove,\'94 which he did not\
      put on his cards and frequented. He had joined this Liberal\
      institution five years ago, having made sure that its members\
      were now nearly all sound Conservatives in heart and pocket, if\
      not in principle. Uncle Nicholas had put him up. The fine\
      reading-room was decorated in the Adam style.\
\
      On entering that evening he glanced at the tape for any news\
      about the Transvaal, and noted that Consols were down\
      seven-sixteenths since the morning. He was turning away to seek\
      the reading-room when a voice behind him said:\
\
      \'93Well, Soames, that went off all right.\'94\
\
      It was Uncle Nicholas, in a frock-coat and his special cut-away\
      collar, with a black tie passed through a ring. Heavens! How\
      young and dapper he looked at eighty-two!\
\
      \'93I think Roger\'92d have been pleased,\'94 his uncle went on. \'93The\
      thing was very well done. Blackley\'92s? I\'92ll make a note of them.\
      Buxton\'92s done me no good. These Boers are upsetting me\'97that\
      fellow Chamberlain\'92s driving the country into war. What do you\
      think?\'94\
\
      \'93Bound to come,\'94 murmured Soames.\
\
      Nicholas passed his hand over his thin, clean-shaven cheeks, very\
      rosy after his summer cure; a slight pout had gathered on his\
      lips. This business had revived all his Liberal principles.\
\
      \'93I mistrust that chap; he\'92s a stormy petrel. House-property will\
      go down if there\'92s war. You\'92ll have trouble with Roger\'92s estate.\
      I often told him he ought to get out of some of his houses. He\
      was an opinionated beggar.\'94\
\
      \'93There was a pair of you!\'94 thought Soames. But he never argued\
      with an uncle, in that way preserving their opinion of him as \'93a\
      long-headed chap,\'94 and the legal care of their property.\
\
      \'93They tell me at Timothy\'92s,\'94 said Nicholas, lowering his voice,\
      \'93that Dartie has gone off at last. That\'92ll be a relief to your\
      father. He was a rotten egg.\'94\
\
      Again Soames nodded. If there was a subject on which the Forsytes\
      really agreed, it was the character of Montague Dartie.\
\
      \'93You take care,\'94 said Nicholas, \'93or he\'92ll turn up again. Winifred\
      had better have the tooth out, I should say. No use preserving\
      what\'92s gone bad.\'94\
\
      Soames looked at him sideways. His nerves, exacerbated by the\
      interview he had just come through, disposed him to see a\
      personal allusion in those words.\
\
      \'93I\'92m advising her,\'94 he said shortly.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Nicholas, \'93the brougham\'92s waiting; I must get home.\
      I\'92m very poorly. Remember me to your father.\'94\
\
      And having thus reconsecrated the ties of blood, he passed down\
      the steps at his youthful gait and was wrapped into his fur coat\
      by the junior porter.\
\
      \'93I\'92ve never known Uncle Nicholas other than \'91very poorly,\'92\'94 mused\
      Soames, \'93or seen him look other than everlasting. What a family!\
      Judging by him, I\'92ve got thirty-eight years of health before me.\
      Well, I\'92m not going to waste them.\'94 And going over to a mirror he\
      stood looking at his face. Except for a line or two, and three or\
      four grey hairs in his little dark moustache, had he aged any\
      more than Irene? The prime of life\'97he and she in the very prime\
      of life! And a fantastic thought shot into his mind. Absurd!\
      Idiotic! But again it came. And genuinely alarmed by the\
      recurrence, as one is by the second fit of shivering which\
      presages a feverish cold, he sat down on the weighing machine.\
      Eleven stone! He had not varied two pounds in twenty years. What\
      age was she? Nearly thirty-seven\'97not too old to have a child\'97not\
      at all! Thirty-seven on the ninth of next month. He remembered\
      her birthday well\'97he had always observed it religiously, even\
      that last birthday so soon before she left him, when he was\
      almost certain she was faithless. Four birthdays in his house. He\
      had looked forward to them, because his gifts had meant a\
      semblance of gratitude, a certain attempt at warmth. Except,\
      indeed, that last birthday\'97which had tempted him to be too\
      religious! And he shied away in thought. Memory heaps dead leaves\
      on corpse-like deeds, from under which they do but vaguely offend\
      the sense. And then he thought suddenly: \'93I could send her a\
      present for her birthday. After all, we\'92re Christians!\
      Couldn\'92t!\'97couldn\'92t we join up again!\'94 And he uttered a deep sigh\
      sitting there. Annette! Ah! but between him and Annette was the\
      need for that wretched divorce suit! And how?\
\
      \'93A man can always work these things, if he\'92ll take it on\
      himself,\'94 Jolyon had said.\
\
      But why should he take the scandal on himself with his whole\
      career as a pillar of the law at stake? It was not fair! It was\
      quixotic! Twelve years\'92 separation in which he had taken no steps\
      to free himself put out of court the possibility of using her\
      conduct with Bosinney as a ground for divorcing her. By doing\
      nothing to secure relief he had acquiesced, even if the evidence\
      could now be gathered, which was more than doubtful. Besides, his\
      own pride would never let him use that old incident, he had\
      suffered from it too much. No! Nothing but fresh misconduct on\
      her part\'97but she had denied it; and\'97almost\'97he had believed her.\
      Hung up! Utterly hung up!\
\
      He rose from the scooped-out red velvet seat with a feeling of\
      constriction about his vitals. He would never sleep with this\
      going on in him! And, taking coat and hat again, he went out,\
      moving eastward. In Trafalgar Square he became aware of some\
      special commotion travelling towards him out of the mouth of the\
      Strand. It materialised in newspaper men calling out so loudly\
      that no words whatever could be heard. He stopped to listen, and\
      one came by.\
\
      \'93Payper! Special! Ultimatium by Krooger! Declaration of war!\'94\
      Soames bought the paper. There it was in the stop press...! His\
      first thought was: \'93The Boers are committing suicide.\'94 His\
      second: \'93Is there anything still I ought to sell?\'94 If so he had\
      missed the chance\'97there would certainly be a slump in the city\
      to-morrow. He swallowed this thought with a nod of defiance. That\
      ultimatum was insolent\'97sooner than let it pass he was prepared to\
      lose money. They wanted a lesson, and they would get it; but it\
      would take three months at least to bring them to heel. There\
      weren\'92t the troops out there; always behind time, the Government!\
      Confound those newspaper rats! What was the use of waking\
      everybody up? Breakfast to-morrow was quite soon enough. And he\
      thought with alarm of his father. They would cry it down Park\
      Lane. Hailing a hansom, he got in and told the man to drive\
      there.\
\
      James and Emily had just gone up to bed, and after communicating\
      the news to Warmson, Soames prepared to follow. He paused by\
      after-thought to say:\
\
      \'93What do you think of it, Warmson?\'94\
\
      The butler ceased passing a hat brush over the silk hat Soames\
      had taken off, and, inclining his face a little forward, said in\
      a low voice: \'93Well, sir, they \'92aven\'92t a chance, of course; but\
      I\'92m told they\'92re very good shots. I\'92ve got a son in the\
      Inniskillings.\'94\
\
      \'93You, Warmson? Why, I didn\'92t know you were married.\'94\
\
      \'93No, sir. I don\'92t talk of it. I expect he\'92ll be going out.\'94\
\
      The slighter shock Soames had felt on discovering that he knew so\
      little of one whom he thought he knew so well was lost in the\
      slight shock of discovering that the war might touch one\
      personally. Born in the year of the Crimean War, he had only come\
      to consciousness by the time the Indian Mutiny was over; since\
      then the many little wars of the British Empire had been entirely\
      professional, quite unconnected with the Forsytes and all they\
      stood for in the body politic. This war would surely be no\
      exception. But his mind ran hastily over his family. Two of the\
      Haymans, he had heard, were in some Yeomanry or other\'97it had\
      always been a pleasant thought, there was a certain distinction\
      about the Yeomanry; they wore, or used to wear, a blue uniform\
      with silver about it, and rode horses. And Archibald, he\
      remembered, had once on a time joined the Militia, but had given\
      it up because his father, Nicholas, had made such a fuss about\
      his \'93wasting his time peacocking about in a uniform.\'94 Recently he\
      had heard somewhere that young Nicholas\'92 eldest, very young\
      Nicholas, had become a Volunteer. \'93No,\'94 thought Soames, mounting\
      the stairs slowly, \'93there\'92s nothing in that!\'94\
\
      He stood on the landing outside his parents\'92 bed and dressing\
      rooms, debating whether or not to put his nose in and say a\
      reassuring word. Opening the landing window, he listened. The\
      rumble from Piccadilly was all the sound he heard, and with the\
      thought, \'93If these motor-cars increase, it\'92ll affect house\
      property,\'94 he was about to pass on up to the room always kept\
      ready for him when he heard, distant as yet, the hoarse rushing\
      call of a newsvendor. There it was, and coming past the house! He\
      knocked on his mother\'92s door and went in.\
\
      His father was sitting up in bed, with his ears pricked under the\
      white hair which Emily kept so beautifully cut. He looked pink,\
      and extraordinarily clean, in his setting of white sheet and\
      pillow, out of which the points of his high, thin, nightgowned\
      shoulders emerged in small peaks. His eyes alone, grey and\
      distrustful under their withered lids, were moving from the\
      window to Emily, who in a wrapper was walking up and down,\
      squeezing a rubber ball attached to a scent bottle. The room\
      reeked faintly of the eau-de-Cologne she was spraying.\
\
      \'93All right!\'94 said Soames, \'93it\'92s not a fire. The Boers have\
      declared war\'97that\'92s all.\'94\
\
      Emily stopped her spraying.\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 was all she said, and looked at James.\
\
      Soames, too, looked at his father. He was taking it differently\
      from their expectation, as if some thought, strange to them, were\
      working in him.\
\
      \'93H\'92m!\'94 he muttered suddenly, \'93I shan\'92t live to see the end of\
      this.\'94\
\
      \'93Nonsense, James! It\'92ll be over by Christmas.\'94\
\
      \'93What do you know about it?\'94 James answered her with asperity.\
      \'93It\'92s a pretty mess at this time of night, too!\'94 He lapsed into\
      silence, and his wife and son, as if hypnotised, waited for him\
      to say: \'93I can\'92t tell\'97I don\'92t know; I knew how it would be!\'94 But\
      he did not. The grey eyes shifted, evidently seeing nothing in\
      the room; then movement occurred under the bedclothes, and the\
      knees were drawn up suddenly to a great height.\
\
      \'93They ought to send out Roberts. It all comes from that fellow\
      Gladstone and his Majuba.\'94\
\
      The two listeners noted something beyond the usual in his voice,\
      something of real anxiety. It was as if he had said: \'93I shall\
      never see the old country peaceful and safe again. I shall have\
      to die before I know she\'92s won.\'94 And in spite of the feeling that\
      James must not be encouraged to be fussy, they were touched.\
      Soames went up to the bedside and stroked his father\'92s hand which\
      had emerged from under the bedclothes, long and wrinkled with\
      veins.\
\
      \'93Mark my words!\'94 said James, \'93consols will go to par. For all I\
      know, Val may go and enlist.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, come, James!\'94 cried Emily, \'93you talk as if there were\
      danger.\'94\
\
      Her comfortable voice seemed to soothe James for once.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he muttered, \'93I told you how it would be. I don\'92t know,\
      I\'92m sure\'97nobody tells me anything. Are you sleeping here, my\
      boy?\'94\
\
      The crisis was past, he would now compose himself to his normal\
      degree of anxiety; and, assuring his father that he was sleeping\
      in the house, Soames pressed his hand, and went up to his room.\
\
      The following afternoon witnessed the greatest crowd Timothy\'92s\
      had known for many a year. On national occasions, such as this,\
      it was, indeed, almost impossible to avoid going there. Not that\
      there was any danger or rather only just enough to make it\
      necessary to assure each other that there was none.\
\
      Nicholas was there early. He had seen Soames the night\
      before\'97Soames had said it was bound to come. This old Kruger was\
      in his dotage\'97why, he must be seventy-five if he was a day!\
\
      (Nicholas was eighty-two.) What had Timothy said? He had had a\
      fit after Majuba. These Boers were a grasping lot! The\
      dark-haired Francie, who had arrived on his heels, with the\
      contradictious touch which became the free spirit of a daughter\
      of Roger, chimed in:\
\
      \'93Kettle and pot, Uncle Nicholas. What price the Uitlanders?\'94 What\
      price, indeed! A new expression, and believed to be due to her\
      brother George.\
\
      Aunt Juley thought Francie ought not to say such a thing. Dear\
      Mrs. MacAnder\'92s boy, Charlie MacAnder, was one, and no one could\
      call him grasping. At this Francie uttered one of her _mots_,\
      scandalising, and so frequently repeated:\
\
      \'93Well, his father\'92s a Scotchman, and his mother\'92s a cat.\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley covered her ears, too late, but Aunt Hester smiled; as\
      for Nicholas, he pouted\'97witticism of which he was not the author\
      was hardly to his taste. Just then Marian Tweetyman arrived,\
      followed almost immediately by young Nicholas. On seeing his son,\
      Nicholas rose.\
\
      \'93Well, I must be going,\'94 he said, \'93Nick here will tell you\
      what\'92ll win the race.\'94 And with this hit at his eldest, who, as a\
      pillar of accountancy, and director of an insurance company, was\
      no more addicted to sport than his father had ever been, he\
      departed. Dear Nicholas! What race was that? Or was it only one\
      of his jokes? He was a wonderful man for his age! How many lumps\
      would dear Marian take? And how were Giles and Jesse? Aunt Juley\
      supposed their Yeomanry would be very busy now, guarding the\
      coast, though of course the Boers had no ships. But one never\
      knew what the French might do if they had the chance, especially\
      since that dreadful Fashoda scare, which had upset Timothy so\
      terribly that he had made no investments for months afterwards.\
      It was the ingratitude of the Boers that was so dreadful, after\
      everything had been done for them\'97Dr. Jameson imprisoned, and he\
      was so nice, Mrs. MacAnder had always said. And Sir Alfred Milner\
      sent out to talk to them\'97such a clever man! She didn\'92t know what\
      they wanted.\
\
      But at this moment occurred one of those sensations\'97so precious\
      at Timothy\'92s\'97which great occasions sometimes bring forth:\
\
      \'93Miss June Forsyte.\'94\
\
      Aunts Juley and Hester were on their feet at once, trembling from\
      smothered resentment, and old affection bubbling up, and pride at\
      the return of a prodigal June! Well, this _was_ a surprise! Dear\
      June\'97after all these years! And how well she was looking! Not\
      changed at all! It was almost on their lips to add, \'93And how is\
      your dear grandfather?\'94 forgetting in that giddy moment that poor\
      dear Jolyon had been in his grave for seven years now.\
\
      Ever the most courageous and downright of all the Forsytes, June,\
      with her decided chin and her spirited eyes and her hair like\
      flame, sat down, slight and short, on a gilt chair with a\
      bead-worked seat, for all the world as if ten years had not\
      elapsed since she had been to see them\'97ten years of travel and\
      independence and devotion to lame ducks. Those ducks of late had\
      been all definitely painters, etchers, or sculptors, so that her\
      impatience with the Forsytes and their hopelessly inartistic\
      outlook had become intense. Indeed, she had almost ceased to\
      believe that her family existed, and looked round her now with a\
      sort of challenging directness which brought exquisite discomfort\
      to the roomful. She had not expected to meet any of them but \'93the\
      poor old things\'94; and why she had come to see _them_ she hardly\
      knew, except that, while on her way from Oxford Street to a\
      studio in Latimer Road, she had suddenly remembered them with\
      compunction as two long-neglected old lame ducks.\
\
      Aunt Juley broke the hush again. \'93We\'92ve just been saying, dear,\
      how dreadful it is about these Boers! And what an impudent thing\
      of that old Kruger!\'94\
\
      \'93Impudent!\'94 said June. \'93I think he\'92s quite right. What business\
      have we to meddle with them? If he turned out all those wretched\
      Uitlanders it would serve them right. They\'92re only after money.\'94\
\
      The silence of sensation was broken by Francie saying:\
\
      \'93What? Are you a pro-Boer?\'94 (undoubtedly the first use of that\
      expression).\
\
      \'93Well! Why can\'92t we leave them alone?\'94 said June, just as, in the\
      open doorway, the maid said \'93Mr. Soames Forsyte.\'94 Sensation on\
      sensation! Greeting was almost held up by curiosity to see how\
      June and he would take this encounter, for it was shrewdly\
      suspected, if not quite known, that they had not met since that\
      old and lamentable affair of her fiance Bosinney with Soames\'92\
      wife. They were seen to just touch each other\'92s hands, and look\
      each at the other\'92s left eye only. Aunt Juley came at once to the\
      rescue:\
\
      \'93Dear June is so original. Fancy, Soames, she thinks the Boers\
      are not to blame.\'94\
\
      \'93They only want their independence,\'94 said June; \'93and why\
      shouldn\'92t they have it?\'94\
\
      \'93Because,\'94 answered Soames, with his smile a little on one side,\
      \'93they happen to have agreed to our suzerainty.\'94\
\
      \'93Suzerainty!\'94 repeated June scornfully; \'93we shouldn\'92t like\
      anyone\'92s suzerainty over us.\'94\
\
      \'93They got advantages in payment,\'94 replied Soames; \'93a contract is\
      a contract.\'94\
\
      \'93Contracts are not always just,\'94 fumed out June, \'93and when\
      they\'92re not, they ought to be broken. The Boers are much the\
      weaker. We could afford to be generous.\'94\
\
      Soames sniffed. \'93That\'92s mere sentiment,\'94 he said.\
\
      Aunt Hester, to whom nothing was more awful than any kind of\
      disagreement, here leaned forward and remarked decisively:\
\
      \'93What lovely weather it has been for the time of year?\'94\
\
      But June was not to be diverted.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know why sentiment should be sneered at. It\'92s the best\
      thing in the world.\'94 She looked defiantly round, and Aunt Juley\
      had to intervene again:\
\
      \'93Have you bought any pictures lately, Soames?\'94\
\
      Her incomparable instinct for the wrong subject had not failed\
      her. Soames flushed. To disclose the name of his latest purchases\
      would be like walking into the jaws of disdain. For somehow they\
      all knew of June\'92s predilection for \'93genius\'94 not yet on its legs,\
      and her contempt for \'93success\'94 unless she had had a finger in\
      securing it.\
\
      \'93One or two,\'94 he muttered.\
\
      But June\'92s face had changed; the Forsyte within her was seeing\
      its chance. Why should not Soames buy some of the pictures of\
      Eric Cobbley\'97her last lame duck? And she promptly opened her\
      attack: Did Soames know his work? It was so wonderful. He was the\
      coming man.\
\
      Oh, yes, Soames knew his work. It was in his view \'93splashy,\'94 and\
      would never get hold of the public.\
\
      June blazed up.\
\
      \'93Of course it won\'92t; that\'92s the last thing one would wish for. I\
      thought you were a connoisseur, not a picture-dealer.\'94\
\
      \'93Of course Soames is a connoisseur,\'94 Aunt Juley said hastily; \'93he\
      has wonderful taste\'97he can always tell beforehand what\'92s going to\
      be successful.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 gasped June, and sprang up from the bead-covered chair, \'93I\
      hate that standard of success. Why can\'92t people buy things\
      because they like them?\'94\
\
      \'93You mean,\'94 said Francie, \'93because _you_ like them.\'94\
\
      And in the slight pause young Nicholas was heard saying gently\
      that Violet (his fourth) was taking lessons in pastel, he didn\'92t\
      know if they were any use.\
\
      \'93Well, good-bye, Auntie,\'94 said June; \'93I must get on,\'94 and kissing\
      her aunts, she looked defiantly round the room, said \'93Good-bye\'94\
      again, and went. A breeze seemed to pass out with her, as if\
      everyone had sighed.\
\
      The third sensation came before anyone had time to speak:\
\
      \'93Mr. James Forsyte.\'94\
\
      James came in using a stick slightly and wrapped in a fur coat\
      which gave him a fictitious bulk.\
\
      Everyone stood up. James was so old; and he had not been at\
      Timothy\'92s for nearly two years.\
\
      \'93It\'92s hot in here,\'94 he said.\
\
      Soames divested him of his coat, and as he did so could not help\
      admiring the glossy way his father was turned out. James sat\
      down, all knees, elbows, frock-coat, and long white whiskers.\
\
      \'93What\'92s the meaning of that?\'94 he said.\
\
      Though there was no apparent sense in his words, they all knew\
      that he was referring to June. His eyes searched his son\'92s face.\
\
      \'93I thought I\'92d come and see for myself. What have they answered\
      Kruger?\'94\
\
      Soames took out an evening paper, and read the headline.\
\
      \'93\'91Instant action by our Government\'97state of war existing!\'92\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 said James, and sighed. \'93I was afraid they\'92d cut and run\
      like old Gladstone. We shall finish with them this time.\'94\
\
      All stared at him. James! Always fussy, nervous, anxious! James\
      with his continual, \'93I told you how it would be!\'94 and his\
      pessimism, and his cautious investments. There was something\
      uncanny about such resolution in this the oldest living Forsyte.\
\
      \'93Where\'92s Timothy?\'94 said James. \'93He ought to pay attention to\
      this.\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley said she didn\'92t know; Timothy had not said much at\
      lunch to-day. Aunt Hester rose and threaded her way out of the\
      room, and Francie said rather maliciously:\
\
      \'93The Boers are a hard nut to crack, Uncle James.\'94\
\
      \'93H\'92m!\'94 muttered James. \'93Where do you get your information? Nobody\
      tells me.\'94\
\
      Young Nicholas remarked in his mild voice that Nick (his eldest)\
      was now going to drill regularly.\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 muttered James, and stared before him\'97his thoughts were on\
      Val. \'93He\'92s got to look after his mother,\'94 he said, \'93he\'92s got no\
      time for drilling and that, with that father of his.\'94 This\
      cryptic saying produced silence, until he spoke again.\
\
      \'93What did June want here?\'94 And his eyes rested with suspicion on\
      all of them in turn. \'93Her father\'92s a rich man now.\'94 The\
      conversation turned on Jolyon, and when he had been seen last. It\
      was supposed that he went abroad and saw all sorts of people now\
      that his wife was dead; his water-colours were on the line, and\
      he was a successful man. Francie went so far as to say:\
\
      \'93I should like to see him again; he was rather a dear.\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley recalled how he had gone to sleep on the sofa one day,\
      where James was sitting. He had always been very amiable; what\
      did Soames think?\
\
      Knowing that Jolyon was Irene\'92s trustee, all felt the delicacy of\
      this question, and looked at Soames with interest. A faint pink\
      had come up in his cheeks.\
\
      \'93He\'92s going grey,\'94 he said.\
\
      Indeed! Had Soames seen him? Soames nodded, and the pink\
      vanished.\
\
      James said suddenly: \'93Well\'97I don\'92t know, I can\'92t tell.\'94\
\
      It so exactly expressed the sentiment of everybody present that\
      there was something behind everything, that nobody responded. But\
      at this moment Aunt Hester returned.\
\
      \'93Timothy,\'94 she said in a low voice, \'93Timothy has bought a map,\
      and he\'92s put in\'97he\'92s put in three flags.\'94\
\
      Timothy had...! A sigh went round the company.\
\
      If Timothy had indeed put in three flags already, well!\'97it showed\
      what the nation could do when it was roused. The war was as good\
      as over.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER XIII JOLYON FINDS OUT WHERE HE IS\
\
\
      Jolyon stood at the window in Holly\'92s old night nursery,\
      converted into a studio, not because it had a north light, but\
      for its view over the prospect away to the Grand Stand at Epsom.\
      He shifted to the side window which overlooked the stableyard,\
      and whistled down to the dog Balthasar who lay for ever under the\
      clock tower. The old dog looked up and wagged his tail. \'93Poor old\
      boy!\'94 thought Jolyon, shifting back to the other window.\
\
      He had been restless all this week, since his attempt to\
      prosecute trusteeship, uneasy in his conscience which was ever\
      acute, disturbed in his sense of compassion which was easily\
      excited, and with a queer sensation as if his feeling for beauty\
      had received some definite embodiment. Autumn was getting hold of\
      the old oak-tree, its leaves were browning. Sunshine had been\
      plentiful and hot this summer. As with trees, so with men\'92s\
      lives! \'93_I_ ought to live long,\'94 thought Jolyon; \'93I\'92m getting\
      mildewed for want of heat. If I can\'92t work, I shall be off to\
      Paris.\'94 But memory of Paris gave him no pleasure. Besides, how\
      could he go? He must stay and see what Soames was going to do.\
      \'93I\'92m her trustee. I can\'92t leave her unprotected,\'94 he thought. It\
      had been striking him as curious how very clearly he could still\
      see Irene in her little drawing-room which he had only twice\
      entered. Her beauty must have a sort of poignant harmony! No\
      literal portrait would ever do her justice; the essence of her\
      was\'97ah I what?... The noise of hoofs called him back to the other\
      window. Holly was riding into the yard on her long-tailed\
      \'93palfrey.\'94 She looked up and he waved to her. She had been rather\
      silent lately; getting old, he supposed, beginning to want her\
      future, as they all did\'97youngsters!\
\
      Time was certainly the devil! And with the feeling that to waste\
      this swift-travelling commodity was unforgivable folly, he took\
      up his brush. But it was no use; he could not concentrate his\
      eye\'97besides, the light was going. \'93I\'92ll go up to town,\'94 he\
      thought. In the hall a servant met him.\
\
      \'93A lady to see you, sir; Mrs. Heron.\'94\
\
      Extraordinary coincidence! Passing into the picture-gallery, as\
      it was still called, he saw Irene standing over by the window.\
\
      She came towards him saying:\
\
      \'93I\'92ve been trespassing; I came up through the coppice and garden.\
      I always used to come that way to see Uncle Jolyon.\'94\
\
      \'93You couldn\'92t trespass here,\'94 replied Jolyon; \'93history makes that\
      impossible. I was just thinking of you.\'94\
\
      Irene smiled. And it was as if something shone through; not mere\
      spirituality\'97serener, completer, more alluring.\
\
      \'93History!\'94 she answered; \'93I once told Uncle Jolyon that love was\
      for ever. Well, it isn\'92t. Only aversion lasts.\'94\
\
      Jolyon stared at her. Had she got over Bosinney at last?\
\
      \'93Yes!\'94 he said, \'93aversion\'92s deeper than love or hate because it\'92s\
      a natural product of the nerves, and we don\'92t change them.\'94\
\
      \'93I came to tell you that Soames has been to see me. He said a\
      thing that frightened me. He said: \'91You are still my wife!\'92\'94\
\
      \'93What!\'94 ejaculated Jolyon. \'93You ought not to live alone.\'94 And he\
      continued to stare at her, afflicted by the thought that where\
      Beauty was, nothing ever ran quite straight, which, no doubt, was\
      why so many people looked on it as immoral.\
\
      \'93What more?\'94\
\
      \'93He asked me to shake hands.\'94\
\
      \'93Did you?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes. When he came in I\'92m sure he didn\'92t want to; he changed\
      while he was there.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah! you certainly ought not to go on living there alone.\'94\
\
      \'93I know no woman I could ask; and I can\'92t take a lover to order,\
      Cousin Jolyon.\'94\
\
      \'93Heaven forbid!\'94 said Jolyon. \'93What a damnable position! Will you\
      stay to dinner? No? Well, let me see you back to town; I wanted\
      to go up this evening.\'94\
\
      \'93Truly?\'94\
\
      \'93Truly. I\'92ll be ready in five minutes.\'94\
\
      On that walk to the station they talked of pictures and music,\
      contrasting the English and French characters and the difference\
      in their attitude to Art. But to Jolyon the colours in the hedges\
      of the long straight lane, the twittering of chaffinches who kept\
      pace with them, the perfume of weeds being already burned, the\
      turn of her neck, the fascination of those dark eyes bent on him\
      now and then, the lure of her whole figure, made a deeper\
      impression than the remarks they exchanged. Unconsciously he held\
      himself straighter, walked with a more elastic step.\
\
      In the train he put her through a sort of catechism as to what\
      she did with her days.\
\
      Made her dresses, shopped, visited a hospital, played her piano,\
      translated from the French.\
\
      She had regular work from a publisher, it seemed, which\
      supplemented her income a little. She seldom went out in the\
      evening. \'93I\'92ve been living alone so long, you see, that I don\'92t\
      mind it a bit. I believe I\'92m naturally solitary.\'94\
\
      \'93I don\'92t believe that,\'94 said Jolyon. \'93Do you know many people?\'94\
\
      \'93Very few.\'94\
\
      At Waterloo they took a hansom, and he drove with her to the door\
      of her mansions. Squeezing her hand at parting, he said:\
\
      \'93You know, you could always come to us at Robin Hill; you must\
      let me know everything that happens. Good-bye, Irene.\'94\
\
      \'93Good-bye,\'94 she answered softly.\
\
      Jolyon climbed back into his cab, wondering why he had not asked\
      her to dine and go to the theatre with him. Solitary, starved,\
      hung-up life that she had! \'93Hotch Potch Club,\'94 he said through\
      the trap-door. As his hansom debouched on to the Embankment, a\
      man in top-hat and overcoat passed, walking quickly, so close to\
      the wall that he seemed to be scraping it.\
\
      \'93By Jove!\'94 thought Jolyon; \'93Soames himself! What\'92s _he_ up to\
      now?\'94 And, stopping the cab round the corner, he got out and\
      retraced his steps to where he could see the entrance to the\
      mansions. Soames had halted in front of them, and was looking up\
      at the light in her windows. \'93If he goes in,\'94 thought Jolyon,\
      \'93what shall I do? What have I the right to do?\'94 What the fellow\
      had said was true. She was still his wife, absolutely without\
      protection from annoyance! \'93Well, if he goes in,\'94 he thought, \'93I\
      follow.\'94 And he began moving towards the mansions. Again Soames\
      advanced; he was in the very entrance now. But suddenly he\
      stopped, spun round on his heel, and came back towards the river.\
      \'93What now?\'94 thought Jolyon. \'93In a dozen steps he\'92ll recognise\
      me.\'94 And he turned tail. His cousin\'92s footsteps kept pace with\
      his own. But he reached his cab, and got in before Soames had\
      turned the corner. \'93Go on!\'94 he said through the trap. Soames\'92\
      figure ranged up alongside.\
\
      \'93Hansom!\'94 he said. \'93Engaged? Hallo!\'94\
\
      \'93Hallo!\'94 answered Jolyon. \'93You?\'94\
\
      The quick suspicion on his cousin\'92s face, white in the lamplight,\
      decided him.\
\
      \'93I can give you a lift,\'94 he said, \'93if you\'92re going West.\'94\
\
      \'93Thanks,\'94 answered Soames, and got in.\
\
      \'93I\'92ve been seeing Irene,\'94 said Jolyon when the cab had started.\
\
      \'93Indeed!\'94\
\
      \'93You went to see her yesterday yourself, I understand.\'94\
\
      \'93I did,\'94 said Soames; \'93she\'92s my wife, you know.\'94\
\
      The tone, the half-lifted sneering lip, roused sudden anger in\
      Jolyon; but he subdued it.\
\
      \'93You ought to know best,\'94 he said, \'93but if you want a divorce\
      it\'92s not very wise to go seeing her, is it? One can\'92t run with\
      the hare and hunt with the hounds?\'94\
\
      \'93You\'92re very good to warn me,\'94 said Soames, \'93but I have not made\
      up my mind.\'94\
\
      \'93_She_ has,\'94 said Jolyon, looking straight before him; \'93you can\'92t\
      take things up, you know, as they were twelve years ago.\'94\
\
      \'93That remains to be seen.\'94\
\
      \'93Look here!\'94 said Jolyon, \'93she\'92s in a damnable position, and I am\
      the only person with any legal say in her affairs.\'94\
\
      \'93Except myself,\'94 retorted Soames, \'93who am also in a damnable\
      position. Hers is what she made for herself; mine what she made\
      for me. I am not at all sure that in her own interests I shan\'92t\
      require her to return to me.\'94\
\
      \'93What!\'94 exclaimed Jolyon; and a shiver went through his whole\
      body.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know what you may mean by \'91what,\'92\'94 answered Soames\
      coldly; \'93your say in her affairs is confined to paying out her\
      income; please bear that in mind. In choosing not to disgrace her\
      by a divorce, I retained my rights, and, as I say, I am not at\
      all sure that I shan\'92t require to exercise them.\'94\
\
      \'93My God!\'94 ejaculated Jolyon, and he uttered a short laugh.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Soames, and there was a deadly quality in his voice.\
      \'93I\'92ve not forgotten the nickname your father gave me, \'91The man of\
      property\'92. I\'92m not called names for nothing.\'94\
\
      \'93This is fantastic,\'94 murmured Jolyon. Well, the fellow couldn\'92t\
      force his wife to live with him. Those days were past, anyway!\
      And he looked around at Soames with the thought: \'93Is he real,\
      this man?\'94 But Soames looked very real, sitting square yet almost\
      elegant with the clipped moustache on his pale face, and a tooth\
      showing where a lip was lifted in a fixed smile. There was a long\
      silence, while Jolyon thought: \'93Instead of helping her, I\'92ve made\
      things worse.\'94 Suddenly Soames said:\
\
      \'93It would be the best thing that could happen to her in many\
      ways.\'94\
\
      At those words such a turmoil began taking place in Jolyon that\
      he could barely sit still in the cab. It was as if he were boxed\
      up with hundreds of thousands of his countrymen, boxed up with\
      that something in the national character which had always been to\
      him revolting, something which he knew to be extremely natural\
      and yet which seemed to him inexplicable\'97their intense belief in\
      contracts and vested rights, their complacent sense of virtue in\
      the exaction of those rights. Here beside him in the cab was the\
      very embodiment, the corporeal sum as it were, of the possessive\
      instinct\'97his own kinsman, too! It was uncanny and intolerable!\
      \'93But there\'92s something more in it than that!\'94 he thought with a\
      sick feeling. \'93The dog, they say, returns to his vomit! The sight\
      of her has reawakened something. Beauty! The devil\'92s in it!\'94\
\
      \'93As I say,\'94 said Soames, \'93I have not made up my mind. I shall be\
      obliged if you will kindly leave her quite alone.\'94\
\
      Jolyon bit his lips; he who had always hated rows almost welcomed\
      the thought of one now.\
\
      \'93I can give you no such promise,\'94 he said shortly.\
\
      \'93Very well,\'94 said Soames, \'93then we know where we are. I\'92ll get\
      down here.\'94 And stopping the cab he got out without word or sign\
      of farewell. Jolyon travelled on to his Club.\
\
      The first news of the war was being called in the streets, but he\
      paid no attention. What could he do to help her? If only his\
      father were alive! _He_ could have done so much! But why could he\
      not do all that his father could have done? Was he not old\
      enough?\'97turned fifty and twice married, with grown-up daughters\
      and a son. \'93Queer,\'94 he thought. \'93If she were plain I shouldn\'92t be\
      thinking twice about it. Beauty is the devil, when you\'92re\
      sensitive to it!\'94 And into the Club reading-room he went with a\
      disturbed heart. In that very room he and Bosinney had talked one\
      summer afternoon; he well remembered even now the disguised and\
      secret lecture he had given that young man in the interests of\
      June, the diagnosis of the Forsytes he had hazarded; and how he\
      had wondered what sort of woman it was he was warning him\
      against. And now! He was almost in want of a warning himself.\
      \'93It\'92s deuced funny!\'94 he thought, \'93really deuced funny!\'94\
\
      CHAPTER XIV SOAMES DISCOVERS WHAT HE WANTS\
\
      It is so much easier to say, \'93Then we know where we are,\'94 than to\
      mean anything particular by the words. And in saying them Soames\
      did but vent the jealous rankling of his instincts. He got out of\
      the cab in a state of wary anger\'97with himself for not having seen\
      Irene, with Jolyon for having seen her; and now with his\
      inability to tell exactly what he wanted.\
\
      He had abandoned the cab because he could not bear to remain\
      seated beside his cousin, and walking briskly eastwards he\
      thought: \'93I wouldn\'92t trust that fellow Jolyon a yard. Once\
      outcast, always outcast!\'94 The chap had a natural sympathy\
      with\'97with\'97laxity (he had shied at the word sin, because it was\
      too melodramatic for use by a Forsyte).\
\
      Indecision in desire was to him a new feeling. He was like a\
      child between a promised toy and an old one which had been taken\
      away from him; and he was astonished at himself. Only last Sunday\
      desire had seemed simple\'97just his freedom and Annette. \'93I\'92ll go\
      and dine there,\'94 he thought. To see her might bring back his\
      singleness of intention, calm his exasperation, clear his mind.\
\
      The restaurant was fairly full\'97a good many foreigners and folk\
      whom, from their appearance, he took to be literary or artistic.\
      Scraps of conversation came his way through the clatter of plates\
      and glasses. He distinctly heard the Boers sympathised with, the\
      British Government blamed. \'93Don\'92t think much of their client\'e8le,\'94\
      he thought. He went stolidly through his dinner and special\
      coffee without making his presence known, and when at last he had\
      finished, was careful not to be seen going towards the sanctum of\
      Madame Lamotte. They were, as he entered, having supper\'97such a\
      much nicer-looking supper than the dinner he had eaten that he\
      felt a kind of grief\'97and they greeted him with a surprise so\
      seemingly genuine that he thought with sudden suspicion: \'93I\
      believe they knew I was here all the time.\'94 He gave Annette a\
      look furtive and searching. So pretty, seemingly so candid; could\
      she be angling for him? He turned to Madame Lamotte and said:\
\
      \'93I\'92ve been dining here.\'94\
\
      Really! If she had only known! There were dishes she could have\
      recommended; what a pity! Soames was confirmed in his suspicion.\
      \'93I must look out what I\'92m doing!\'94 he thought sharply.\
\
      \'93Another little cup of very special coffee, _monsieur;_ a\
      liqueur, Grand Marnier?\'94 and Madame Lamotte rose to order these\
      delicacies.\
\
      Alone with Annette Soames said, \'93Well, Annette?\'94 with a defensive\
      little smile about his lips.\
\
      The girl blushed. This, which last Sunday would have set his\
      nerves tingling, now gave him much the same feeling a man has\
      when a dog that he owns wriggles and looks at him. He had a\
      curious sense of power, as if he could have said to her, \'93Come\
      and kiss me,\'94 and she would have come. And yet\'97it was strange\'97but\
      there seemed another face and form in the room too; and the itch\
      in his nerves, was it for that\'97or for this? He jerked his head\
      towards the restaurant and said: \'93You have some queer customers.\
      Do you like this life?\'94\
\
      Annette looked up at him for a moment, looked down, and played\
      with her fork.\
\
      \'93No,\'94 she said, \'93I do not like it.\'94\
\
      \'93I\'92ve got her,\'94 thought Soames, \'93if I want her. But do I want\
      her?\'94 She was graceful, she was pretty\'97very pretty; she was\
      fresh, she had taste of a kind. His eyes travelled round the\
      little room; but the eyes of his mind went another journey\'97a\
      half-light, and silvery walls, a satinwood piano, a woman\
      standing against it, reined back as it were from him\'97a woman with\
      white shoulders that he knew, and dark eyes that he had sought to\
      know, and hair like dull dark amber. And as in an artist who\
      strives for the unrealisable and is ever thirsty, so there rose\
      in him at that moment the thirst of the old passion he had never\
      satisfied.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said calmly, \'93you\'92re young. There\'92s everything before\
      _you_.\'94\
\
      Annette shook her head.\
\
      \'93I think sometimes there is nothing before me but hard work. I am\
      not so in love with work as mother.\'94\
\
      \'93Your mother is a wonder,\'94 said Soames, faintly mocking; \'93she\
      will never let failure lodge in her house.\'94\
\
      Annette sighed. \'93It must be wonderful to be rich.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! You\'92ll be rich some day,\'94 answered Soames, still with that\
      faint mockery; \'93don\'92t be afraid.\'94\
\
      Annette shrugged her shoulders. \'93_Monsieur_ is very kind.\'94 And\
      between her pouting lips she put a chocolate.\
\
      \'93Yes, my dear,\'94 thought Soames, \'93they\'92re very pretty.\'94\
\
      Madame Lamotte, with coffee and liqueur, put an end to that\
      colloquy. Soames did not stay long.\
\
      Outside in the streets of Soho, which always gave him such a\
      feeling of property improperly owned, he mused. If only Irene had\
      given him a son, he wouldn\'92t now be squirming after women! The\
      thought had jumped out of its little dark sentry-box in his inner\
      consciousness. A son\'97something to look forward to, something to\
      make the rest of life worth while, something to leave himself to,\
      some perpetuity of self. \'93If I had a son,\'94 he thought bitterly,\
      \'93a proper legal son, I could make shift to go on as I used. One\
      woman\'92s much the same as another, after all.\'94 But as he walked he\
      shook his head. No! One woman was not the same as another. Many a\
      time had he tried to think that in the old days of his thwarted\
      married life; and he had always failed. He was failing now. He\
      was trying to think Annette the same as that other. But she was\
      not, she had not the lure of that old passion. \'93And Irene\'92s my\
      wife,\'94 he thought, \'93my legal wife. I have done nothing to put her\
      away from me. Why shouldn\'92t she come back to me? It\'92s the right\
      thing, the lawful thing. It makes no scandal, no disturbance. If\
      it\'92s disagreeable to her\'97but why _should_ it be? I\'92m not a leper,\
      and she\'97she\'92s no longer in love!\'94 Why should he be put to the\
      shifts and the sordid disgraces and the lurking defeats of the\
      Divorce Court, when there she was like an empty house only\
      waiting to be retaken into use and possession by him who legally\
      owned her? To one so secretive as Soames the thought of reentry\
      into quiet possession of his own property with nothing given away\
      to the world was intensely alluring. \'93No,\'94 he mused, \'93I\'92m glad I\
      went to see that girl. I know now what I want most. If only Irene\
      will come back I\'92ll be as considerate as she wishes; she could\
      live her own life; but perhaps\'97perhaps she would come round to\
      me.\'94 There was a lump in his throat. And doggedly along by the\
      railings of the Green Park, towards his father\'92s house, he went,\
      trying to tread on his shadow walking before him in the brilliant\
      moonlight.\
\
\
\
\
      PART II\
\
      CHAPTER I THE THIRD GENERATION\
\
\
      Jolly Forsyte was strolling down High Street, Oxford, on a\
      November afternoon; Val Dartie was strolling up. Jolly had just\
      changed out of boating flannels and was on his way to the\
      \'93Frying-pan,\'94 to which he had recently been elected. Val had just\
      changed out of riding clothes and was on his way to the fire\'97a\
      bookmaker\'92s in Cornmarket.\
\
      \'93Hallo!\'94 said Jolly.\
\
      \'93Hallo!\'94 replied Val.\
\
      The cousins had met but twice, Jolly, the second-year man, having\
      invited the freshman to breakfast; and last evening they had seen\
      each other again under somewhat exotic circumstances.\
\
      Over a tailor\'92s in the Cornmarket resided one of those privileged\
      young beings called minors, whose inheritances are large, whose\
      parents are dead, whose guardians are remote, and whose instincts\
      are vicious. At nineteen he had commenced one of those careers\
      attractive and inexplicable to ordinary mortals for whom a single\
      bankruptcy is good as a feast. Already famous for having the only\
      roulette table then to be found in Oxford, he was anticipating\
      his expectations at a dazzling rate. He out-crummed Crum, though\
      of a sanguine and rather beefy type which lacked the latter\'92s\
      fascinating languor. For Val it had been in the nature of baptism\
      to be taken there to play roulette; in the nature of confirmation\
      to get back into college, after hours, through a window whose\
      bars were deceptive. Once, during that evening of delight,\
      glancing up from the seductive green before him, he had caught\
      sight, through a cloud of smoke, of his cousin standing opposite.\
      \'93_Rouge gagne, impair, et manque!_\'94 He had not seen him again.\
\
      \'93Come in to the Frying-pan and have tea,\'94 said Jolly, and they\
      went in.\
\
      A stranger, seeing them together, would have noticed an\
      unseizable resemblance between these second cousins of the third\
      generations of Forsytes; the same bone formation in face, though\
      Jolly\'92s eyes were darker grey, his hair lighter and more wavy.\
\
      \'93Tea and buttered buns, waiter, please,\'94 said Jolly.\
\
      \'93Have one of my cigarettes?\'94 said Val. \'93I saw you last night. How\
      did you do?\'94\
\
      \'93I didn\'92t play.\'94\
\
      \'93I won fifteen quid.\'94\
\
      Though desirous of repeating a whimsical comment on gambling he\
      had once heard his father make\'97\'93When you\'92re fleeced you\'92re sick,\
      and when you fleece you\'92re sorry\'94\'97Jolly contented himself with:\
\
      \'93Rotten game, I think; I was at school with that chap. He\'92s an\
      awful fool.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! I don\'92t know,\'94 said Val, as one might speak in defence of a\
      disparaged god; \'93he\'92s a pretty good sport.\'94\
\
      They exchanged whiffs in silence.\
\
      \'93You met my people, didn\'92t you?\'94 said Jolly. \'93They\'92re coming up\
      to-morrow.\'94\
\
      Val grew a little red.\
\
      \'93Really! I can give you a rare good tip for the Manchester\
      November handicap.\'94\
\
      \'93Thanks, I only take interest in the classic races.\'94\
\
      \'93You can\'92t make any money over them,\'94 said Val.\
\
      \'93I hate the ring,\'94 said Jolly; \'93there\'92s such a row and stink. I\
      like the paddock.\'94\
\
      \'93I like to back my judgment,\'94 answered Val.\
\
      Jolly smiled; his smile was like his father\'92s.\
\
      \'93I haven\'92t got any. I always lose money if I bet.\'94\
\
      \'93You have to buy experience, of course.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, but it\'92s all messed-up with doing people in the eye.\'94\
\
      \'93Of course, or they\'92ll do you\'97that\'92s the excitement.\'94\
\
      Jolly looked a little scornful.\
\
      \'93What do you do with yourself? Row?\'94\
\
      \'93No\'97ride, and drive about. I\'92m going to play polo next term, if I\
      can get my granddad to stump up.\'94\
\
      \'93That\'92s old Uncle James, isn\'92t it? What\'92s he like?\'94\
\
      \'93Older than forty hills,\'94 said Val, \'93and always thinking he\'92s\
      going to be ruined.\'94\
\
      \'93I suppose my granddad and he were brothers.\'94\
\
      \'93I don\'92t believe any of that old lot were sportsmen,\'94 said Val;\
      \'93they must have worshipped money.\'94\
\
      \'93Mine didn\'92t!\'94 said Jolly warmly.\
\
      Val flipped the ash off his cigarette.\
\
      \'93Money\'92s only fit to spend,\'94 he said; \'93I wish the deuce I had\
      more.\'94\
\
      Jolly gave him that direct upward look of judgment which he had\
      inherited from old Jolyon: One didn\'92t talk about money! And again\
      there was silence, while they drank tea and ate the buttered\
      buns.\
\
      \'93Where are your people going to stay?\'94 asked Val, elaborately\
      casual.\
\
      \'93\'91Rainbow.\'92 What do you think of the war?\'94\
\
      \'93Rotten, so far. The Boers aren\'92t sports a bit. Why don\'92t they\
      come out into the open?\'94\
\
      \'93Why should they? They\'92ve got everything against them except\
      their way of fighting. I rather admire them.\'94\
\
      \'93They can ride and shoot,\'94 admitted Val, \'93but they\'92re a lousy\
      lot. Do you know Crum?\'94\
\
      \'93Of Merton? Only by sight. He\'92s in that fast set too, isn\'92t he?\
      Rather La-di-da and Brummagem.\'94\
\
      Val said fixedly: \'93He\'92s a friend of mine.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! Sorry!\'94 And they sat awkwardly staring past each other,\
      having pitched on their pet points of snobbery. For Jolly was\
      forming himself unconsciously on a set whose motto was:\
\
      \'93We defy you to bore us. Life isn\'92t half long enough, and we\'92re\
      going to talk faster and more crisply, do more and know more, and\
      dwell less on any subject than you can possibly imagine. We are\
      \'91the best\'92\'97made of wire and whipcord.\'94 And Val was unconsciously\
      forming himself on a set whose motto was: \'93We defy you to\
      interest or excite us. We have had every sensation, or if we\
      haven\'92t, we pretend we have. We are so exhausted with living that\
      no hours are too small for us. We will lose our shirts with\
      equanimity. We have flown fast and are past everything. All is\
      cigarette smoke. Bismillah!\'94 Competitive spirit, bone-deep in the\
      English, was obliging those two young Forsytes to have ideals;\
      and at the close of a century ideals are mixed. The aristocracy\
      had already in the main adopted the \'93jumping-Jesus\'94 principle;\
      though here and there one like Crum\'97who was an \'93honourable\'94\'97stood\
      starkly languid for that gambler\'92s Nirvana which had been the\
      _summum bonum_ of the old \'93dandies\'94 and of \'93the mashers\'94 in the\
      eighties. And round Crum were still gathered a forlorn hope of\
      blue-bloods with a plutocratic following.\
\
      But there was between the cousins another far less obvious\
      antipathy\'97coming from the unseizable family resemblance, which\
      each perhaps resented; or from some half-consciousness of that\
      old feud persisting still between their branches of the clan,\
      formed within them by odd words or half-hints dropped by their\
      elders. And Jolly, tinkling his teaspoon, was musing: \'93His\
      tie-pin and his waistcoat and his drawl and his betting\'97good\
      Lord!\'94\
\
      And Val, finishing his bun, was thinking: \'93He\'92s rather a young\
      beast!\'94\
\
      \'93I suppose you\'92ll be meeting your people?\'94 he said, getting up.\
      \'93I wish you\'92d tell them I should like to show them over\
      B.N.C.\'97not that there\'92s anything much there\'97if they\'92d care to\
      come.\'94\
\
      \'93Thanks, I\'92ll ask them.\'94\
\
      \'93Would they lunch? I\'92ve got rather a decent scout.\'94\
\
      Jolly doubted if they would have time.\
\
      \'93You\'92ll ask them, though?\'94\
\
      \'93Very good of you,\'94 said Jolly, fully meaning that they should\
      not go; but, instinctively polite, he added: \'93You\'92d better come\
      and have dinner with us to-morrow.\'94\
\
      \'93Rather. What time?\'94\
\
      \'93Seven-thirty.\'94\
\
      \'93Dress?\'94\
\
      \'93No.\'94 And they parted, a subtle antagonism alive within them.\
\
      Holly and her father arrived by a midday train. It was her first\
      visit to the city of spires and dreams, and she was very silent,\
      looking almost shyly at the brother who was part of this\
      wonderful place. After lunch she wandered, examining his\
      household gods with intense curiosity. Jolly\'92s sitting-room was\
      panelled, and Art represented by a set of Bartolozzi prints which\
      had belonged to old Jolyon, and by college photographs\'97of young\
      men, live young men, a little heroic, and to be compared with her\
      memories of Val. Jolyon also scrutinised with care that evidence\
      of his boy\'92s character and tastes.\
\
      Jolly was anxious that they should see him rowing, so they set\
      forth to the river. Holly, between her brother and her father,\
      felt elated when heads were turned and eyes rested on her. That\
      they might see him to the best advantage they left him at the\
      Barge and crossed the river to the towing-path. Slight in\
      build\'97for of all the Forsytes only old Swithin and George were\
      beefy\'97Jolly was rowing \'93Two\'94 in a trial eight. He looked very\
      earnest and strenuous. With pride Jolyon thought him the\
      best-looking boy of the lot; Holly, as became a sister, was more\
      struck by one or two of the others, but would not have said so\
      for the world. The river was bright that afternoon, the meadows\
      lush, the trees still beautiful with colour. Distinguished peace\
      clung around the old city; Jolyon promised himself a day\'92s\
      sketching if the weather held. The Eight passed a second time,\
      spurting home along the Barges\'97Jolly\'92s face was very set, so as\
      not to show that he was blown. They returned across the river and\
      waited for him.\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 said Jolly in the Christ Church meadows, \'93I had to ask that\
      chap Val Dartie to dine with us to-night. He wanted to give you\
      lunch and show you B.N.C., so I thought I\'92d better; then you\
      needn\'92t go. I don\'92t like him much.\'94\
\
      Holly\'92s rather sallow face had become suffused with pink.\
\
      \'93Why not?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! I don\'92t know. He seems to me rather showy and bad form. What\
      are his people like, Dad? He\'92s only a second cousin, isn\'92t he?\'94\
\
      Jolyon took refuge in a smile.\
\
      \'93Ask Holly,\'94 he said; \'93she saw his uncle.\'94\
\
      \'93I _liked_ Val,\'94 Holly answered, staring at the ground before\
      her; \'93his uncle looked\'97awfully different.\'94 She stole a glance at\
      Jolly from under her lashes.\
\
      \'93Did you ever,\'94 said Jolyon with whimsical intention, \'93hear our\
      family history, my dears? It\'92s quite a fairy tale. The first\
      Jolyon Forsyte\'97at all events the first we know anything of, and\
      that would be your great-great-grandfather\'97dwelt in the land of\
      Dorset on the edge of the sea, being by profession an\
      \'91agriculturalist,\'92 as your great-aunt put it, and the son of an\
      agriculturist\'97farmers, in fact; your grandfather used to call\
      them, \'91Very small beer.\'92\'94 He looked at Jolly to see how his\
      lordliness was standing it, and with the other eye noted Holly\'92s\
      malicious pleasure in the slight drop of her brother\'92s face.\
\
      \'93We may suppose him thick and sturdy, standing for England as it\
      was before the Industrial Era began. The second Jolyon\
      Forsyte\'97your great-grandfather, Jolly; better known as Superior\
      Dosset Forsyte\'97built houses, so the chronicle runs, begat ten\
      children, and migrated to London town. It is known that he drank\
      sherry. We may suppose him representing the England of Napoleon\'92s\
      wars, and general unrest. The eldest of his six sons was the\
      third Jolyon, your grandfather, my dears\'97tea merchant and\
      chairman of companies, one of the soundest Englishmen who ever\
      lived\'97and to me the dearest.\'94 Jolyon\'92s voice had lost its irony,\
      and his son and daughter gazed at him solemnly, \'93He was just and\
      tenacious, tender and young at heart. You remember him, and I\
      remember him. Pass to the others! Your great-uncle James, that\'92s\
      young Val\'92s grandfather, had a son called Soames\'97whereby hangs a\
      tale of no love lost, and I don\'92t think I\'92ll tell it you. James\
      and the other eight children of \'91Superior Dosset,\'92 of whom there\
      are still five alive, may be said to have represented Victorian\
      England, with its principles of trade and individualism at five\
      per cent. and your money back\'97if you know what that means. At all\
      events they\'92ve turned thirty thousand pounds into a cool million\
      between them in the course of their long lives. They never did a\
      wild thing\'97unless it was your great-uncle Swithin, who I believe\
      was once swindled at thimble-rig, and was called \'91Four-in-hand\
      Forsyte\'92 because he drove a pair. Their day is passing, and their\
      type, not altogether for the advantage of the country. They were\
      pedestrian, but they too were sound. I am the fourth Jolyon\
      Forsyte\'97a poor holder of the name\'97\'94\
\
      \'93No, Dad,\'94 said Jolly, and Holly squeezed his hand.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 repeated Jolyon, \'93a poor specimen, representing, I\'92m\
      afraid, nothing but the end of the century, unearned income,\
      amateurism, and individual liberty\'97a different thing from\
      individualism, Jolly. You are the fifth Jolyon Forsyte, old man,\
      and you open the ball of the new century.\'94\
\
      As he spoke they turned in through the college gates, and Holly\
      said: \'93It\'92s fascinating, Dad.\'94\
\
      None of them quite knew what she meant. Jolly was grave.\
\
      The Rainbow, distinguished, as only an Oxford hostel can be, for\
      lack of modernity, provided one small oak-panelled private\
      sitting-room, in which Holly sat to receive, white-frocked, shy,\
      and alone, when the only guest arrived. Rather as one would touch\
      a moth, Val took her hand. And wouldn\'92t she wear this \'93measly\
      flower\'94. It would look ripping in her hair. He removed a gardenia\
      from his coat.\
\
      \'93Oh! No, thank you\'97I couldn\'92t!\'94 But she took it and pinned it at\
      her neck, having suddenly remembered that word \'93showy\'94. Val\'92s\
      buttonhole would give offence; and she so much wanted Jolly to\
      like him. Did she realise that Val was at his best and quietest\
      in her presence, and was that, perhaps, half the secret of his\
      attraction for her?\
\
      \'93I never said anything about our ride, Val.\'94\
\
      \'93Rather not! It\'92s just between us.\'94\
\
      By the uneasiness of his hands and the fidgeting of his feet he\
      was giving her a sense of power very delicious; a soft feeling\
      too\'97the wish to make him happy.\
\
      \'93Do tell me about Oxford. It must be ever so lovely.\'94\
\
      Val admitted that it was frightfully decent to do what you liked;\
      the lectures were nothing; and there were some very good chaps.\
      \'93Only,\'94 he added, \'93of course I wish I was in town, and could come\
      down and see you.\'94\
\
      Holly moved one hand shyly on her knee, and her glance dropped.\
\
      \'93You haven\'92t forgotten,\'94 he said, suddenly gathering courage,\
      \'93that we\'92re going mad-rabbiting together?\'94\
\
      Holly smiled.\
\
      \'93Oh! That was only make-believe. One can\'92t do that sort of thing\
      after one\'92s grown up, you know.\'94\
\
      \'93Dash it! cousins can,\'94 said Val. \'93Next Long Vac.\'97it begins in\
      June, you know, and goes on for ever\'97we\'92ll watch our chance.\'94\
\
      But, though the thrill of conspiracy ran through her veins, Holly\
      shook her head. \'93It won\'92t come off,\'94 she murmured.\
\
      \'93Won\'92t it!\'94 said Val fervently; \'93who\'92s going to stop it? Not your\
      father or your brother.\'94\
\
      At this moment Jolyon and Jolly came in; and romance fled into\
      Val\'92s patent leather and Holly\'92s white satin toes, where it\
      itched and tingled during an evening not conspicuous for\
      open-heartedness.\
\
      Sensitive to atmosphere, Jolyon soon felt the latent antagonism\
      between the boys, and was puzzled by Holly; so he became\
      unconsciously ironical, which is fatal to the expansiveness of\
      youth. A letter, handed to him after dinner, reduced him to a\
      silence hardly broken till Jolly and Val rose to go. He went out\
      with them, smoking his cigar, and walked with his son to the\
      gates of Christ Church. Turning back, he took out the letter and\
      read it again beneath a lamp.\
\
      \'93DEAR JOLYON,\
          \'93Soames came again to-night\'97my thirty-seventh birthday. You\
          were right, I mustn\'92t stay here. I\'92m going to-morrow to the\
          Piedmont Hotel, but I won\'92t go abroad without seeing you. I\
          feel lonely and down-hearted.\
\
      \'93Yours affectionately,\
      \'93IRENE.\'94\
\
      He folded the letter back into his pocket and walked on,\
      astonished at the violence of his feelings. What had the fellow\
      said or done?\
\
      He turned into High Street, down the Turf, and on among a maze of\
      spires and domes and long college fronts and walls, bright or\
      dark-shadowed in the strong moonlight. In this very heart of\
      England\'92s gentility it was difficult to realise that a lonely\
      woman could be importuned or hunted, but what else could her\
      letter mean? Soames must have been pressing her to go back to him\
      again, with public opinion and the Law on his side, too!\
      \'93Eighteen-ninety-nine!,\'94 he thought, gazing at the broken glass\
      shining on the top of a villa garden wall; \'93but when it comes to\
      property we\'92re still a heathen people! I\'92ll go up to-morrow\
      morning. I dare say it\'92ll be best for her to go abroad.\'94 Yet the\
      thought displeased him. Why should Soames hunt her out of\
      England! Besides, he might follow, and out there she would be\
      still more helpless against the attentions of her own husband! \'93I\
      must tread warily,\'94 he thought; \'93that fellow could make himself\
      very nasty. I didn\'92t like his manner in the cab the other night.\'94\
      His thoughts turned to his daughter June. Could she help? Once on\
      a time Irene had been her greatest friend, and now she was a\
      \'93lame duck,\'94 such as must appeal to June\'92s nature! He determined\
      to wire to his daughter to meet him at Paddington Station.\
      Retracing his steps towards the Rainbow he questioned his own\
      sensations. Would he be upsetting himself over every woman in\
      like case? No! he would not. The candour of this conclusion\
      discomfited him; and, finding that Holly had gone up to bed, he\
      sought his own room. But he could not sleep, and sat for a long\
      time at his window, huddled in an overcoat, watching the\
      moonlight on the roofs.\
\
      Next door Holly too was awake, thinking of the lashes above and\
      below Val\'92s eyes, especially below; and of what she could do to\
      make Jolly like him better. The scent of the gardenia was strong\
      in her little bedroom, and pleasant to her.\
\
      And Val, leaning out of his first-floor window in B.N.C., was\
      gazing at a moonlit quadrangle without seeing it at all, seeing\
      instead Holly, slim and white-frocked, as she sat beside the fire\
      when he first went in.\
\
      But Jolly, in his bedroom narrow as a ghost, lay with a hand\
      beneath his cheek and dreamed he was with Val in one boat, rowing\
      a race against him, while his father was calling from the\
      towpath: \'93Two! Get your hands away there, bless you!\'94\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER II SOAMES PUTS IT TO THE TOUCH\
\
\
      Of all those radiant firms which emblazon with their windows the\
      West End of London, Gaves and Cortegal were considered by Soames\
      the most \'93attractive\'94 word just coming into fashion. He had never\
      had his Uncle Swithin\'92s taste in precious stones, and the\
      abandonment by Irene when she left his house in 1887 of all the\
      glittering things he had given her had disgusted him with this\
      form of investment. But he still knew a diamond when he saw one,\
      and during the week before her birthday he had taken occasion, on\
      his way into the Poultry or his way out therefrom, to dally a\
      little before the greater jewellers where one got, if not one\'92s\
      money\'92s worth, at least a certain cachet with the goods.\
\
      Constant cogitation since his drive with Jolyon had convinced him\
      more and more of the supreme importance of this moment in his\
      life, the supreme need for taking steps and those not wrong. And,\
      alongside the dry and reasoned sense that it was now or never\
      with his self-preservation, now or never if he were to range\
      himself and found a family, went the secret urge of his senses\
      roused by the sight of her who had once been a passionately\
      desired wife, and the conviction that it was a sin against common\
      sense and the decent secrecy of Forsytes to waste the wife he\
      had.\
\
      In an opinion on Winifred\'92s case, Dreamer, Q.C.\'97he would much\
      have preferred Waterbuck, but they had made him a judge (so late\
      in the day as to rouse the usual suspicion of a political\
      job)\'97had advised that they should go forward and obtain\
      restitution of conjugal rights, a point which to Soames had never\
      been in doubt. When they had obtained a decree to that effect\
      they must wait to see if it was obeyed. If not, it would\
      constitute legal desertion, and they should obtain evidence of\
      misconduct and file their petition for divorce. All of which\
      Soames knew perfectly well. They had marked him ten and one. This\
      simplicity in his sister\'92s case only made him the more desperate\
      about the difficulty in his own. Everything, in fact, was driving\
      him towards the simple solution of Irene\'92s return. If it were\
      still against the grain with her, had _he_ not feelings to\
      subdue, injury to forgive, pain to forget? He at least had never\
      injured her, and this was a world of compromise! He could offer\
      her so much more than she had now. He would be prepared to make a\
      liberal settlement on her which could not be upset. He often\
      scrutinised his image in these days. He had never been a peacock\
      like that fellow Dartie, or fancied himself a woman\'92s man, but he\
      had a certain belief in his own appearance\'97not unjustly, for it\
      was well-coupled and preserved, neat, healthy, pale, unblemished\
      by drink or excess of any kind. The Forsyte jaw and the\
      concentration of his face were, in his eyes, virtues. So far as\
      he could tell there was no feature of him which need inspire\
      dislike.\
\
      Thoughts and yearnings, with which one lives daily, become\
      natural, even if far-fetched in their inception. If he could only\
      give tangible proof enough of his determination to let bygones be\
      bygones, and to do all in his power to please her, why should she\
      not come back to him?\
\
      He entered Gaves and Cortegal\'92s therefore, on the morning of\
      November the 9th, to buy a certain diamond brooch. \'93Four\
      twenty-five and dirt cheap, sir, at the money. It\'92s a lady\'92s\
      brooch.\'94 There was that in his mood which made him accept without\
      demur. And he went on into the Poultry with the flat green\
      morocco case in his breast pocket. Several times that day he\
      opened it to look at the seven soft shining stones in their\
      velvet oval nest.\
\
      \'93If the lady doesn\'92t like it, sir, happy to exchange it any time.\
      But there\'92s no fear of that.\'94 If only there were not! He got\
      through a vast amount of work, only soother of the nerves he\
      knew. A cablegram came while he was in the office with details\
      from the agent in Buenos Aires, and the name and address of a\
      stewardess who would be prepared to swear to what was necessary.\
      It was a timely spur to Soames, with his rooted distaste for the\
      washing of dirty linen in public. And when he set forth by\
      Underground to Victoria Station he received a fresh impetus\
      towards the renewal of his married life from the account in his\
      evening paper of a fashionable divorce suit. The homing instinct\
      of all true Forsytes in anxiety and trouble, the corporate\
      tendency which kept them strong and solid, made him choose to\
      dine at Park Lane. He neither could nor would breathe a word to\
      his people of his intention\'97too reticent and proud\'97but the\
      thought that at least they would be glad if they knew, and wish\
      him luck, was heartening.\
\
      James was in lugubrious mood, for the fire which the impudence of\
      Kruger\'92s ultimatum had lit in him had been cold-watered by the\
      poor success of the last month, and the exhortations to effort in\
      _The Times_. He didn\'92t know where it would end. Soames sought to\
      cheer him by the continual use of the word Buller. But James\
      couldn\'92t tell! There was Colley\'97and he got stuck on that hill,\
      and this Ladysmith was down in a hollow, and altogether it looked\
      to him a \'93pretty kettle of fish\'94; he thought they ought to be\
      sending the sailors\'97they were the chaps, they did a lot of good\
      in the Crimea. Soames shifted the ground of consolation. Winifred\
      had heard from Val that there had been a \'93rag\'94 and a bonfire on\
      Guy Fawkes Day at Oxford, and that he had escaped detection by\
      blacking his face.\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 James muttered, \'93he\'92s a clever little chap.\'94 But he shook\
      his head shortly afterwards and remarked that he didn\'92t know what\
      would become of him, and looking wistfully at his son, murmured\
      on that Soames had never had a boy. He would have liked a\
      grandson of his own name. And now\'97well, there it was!\
\
      Soames flinched. He had not expected such a challenge to disclose\
      the secret in his heart. And Emily, who saw him wince, said:\
\
      \'93Nonsense, James; don\'92t talk like that!\'94\
\
      But James, not looking anyone in the face, muttered on. There\
      were Roger and Nicholas and Jolyon; they all had grandsons. And\
      Swithin and Timothy had never married. He had done his best; but\
      he would soon be gone now. And, as though he had uttered words of\
      profound consolation, he was silent, eating brains with a fork\
      and a piece of bread, and swallowing the bread.\
\
      Soames excused himself directly after dinner. It was not really\
      cold, but he put on his fur coat, which served to fortify him\
      against the fits of nervous shivering to which he had been\
      subject all day. Subconsciously, he knew that he looked better\
      thus than in an ordinary black overcoat. Then, feeling the\
      morocco case flat against his heart, he sallied forth. He was no\
      smoker, but he lit a cigarette, and smoked it gingerly as he\
      walked along. He moved slowly down the Row towards Knightsbridge,\
      timing himself to get to Chelsea at nine-fifteen. What did she do\
      with herself evening after evening in that little hole? How\
      mysterious women were! One lived alongside and knew nothing of\
      them. What could she have seen in that fellow Bosinney to send\
      her mad? For there was madness after all in what she had\
      done\'97crazy moonstruck madness, in which all sense of values had\
      been lost, and her life and his life ruined! And for a moment he\
      was filled with a sort of exaltation, as though he were a man\
      read of in a story who, possessed by the Christian spirit, would\
      restore to her all the prizes of existence, forgiving and\
      forgetting, and becoming the godfather of her future. Under a\
      tree opposite Knightsbridge Barracks, where the moonlight struck\
      down clear and white, he took out once more the morocco case, and\
      let the beams draw colour from those stones. Yes, they were of\
      the first water! But, at the hard closing snap of the case,\
      another cold shiver ran through his nerves; and he walked on\
      faster, clenching his gloved hands in the pockets of his coat,\
      almost hoping she would not be in. The thought of how mysterious\
      she was again beset him. Dining alone there night after night\'97in\
      an evening dress, too, as if she were making believe to be in\
      society! Playing the piano\'97to herself! Not even a dog or cat, so\
      far as he had seen. And that reminded him suddenly of the mare he\
      kept for station work at Mapledurham. If ever he went to the\
      stable, there she was quite alone, half asleep, and yet, on her\
      home journeys going more freely than on her way out, as if\
      longing to be back and lonely in her stable! \'93I would treat her\
      well,\'94 he thought incoherently. \'93I would be very careful.\'94 And\
      all that capacity for home life of which a mocking Fate seemed\
      for ever to have deprived him swelled suddenly in Soames, so that\
      he dreamed dreams opposite South Kensington Station. In the\
      King\'92s Road a man came slithering out of a public house playing a\
      concertina. Soames watched him for a moment dance crazily on the\
      pavement to his own drawling jagged sounds, then crossed over to\
      avoid contact with this piece of drunken foolery. A night in the\
      lock-up! What asses people were! But the man had noticed his\
      movement of avoidance, and streams of genial blasphemy followed\
      him across the street. \'93I hope they\'92ll run him in,\'94 thought\
      Soames viciously. \'93To have ruffians like that about, with women\
      out alone!\'94 A woman\'92s figure in front had induced this thought.\
      Her walk seemed oddly familiar, and when she turned the corner\
      for which he was bound, his heart began to beat. He hastened on\
      to the corner to make certain. Yes! It was Irene; he could not\
      mistake her walk in that little drab street. She threaded two\
      more turnings, and from the last corner he saw her enter her\
      block of flats. To make sure of her now, he ran those few paces,\
      hurried up the stairs, and caught her standing at her door. He\
      heard the latchkey in the lock, and reached her side just as she\
      turned round, startled, in the open doorway.\
\
      \'93Don\'92t be alarmed,\'94 he said, breathless. \'93I happened to see you.\
      Let me come in a minute.\'94\
\
      She had put her hand up to her breast, her face was colourless,\
      her eyes widened by alarm. Then seeming to master herself, she\
      inclined her head, and said: \'93Very well.\'94\
\
      Soames closed the door. He, too, had need to recover, and when\
      she had passed into the sitting-room, waited a full minute,\
      taking deep breaths to still the beating of his heart. At this\
      moment, so fraught with the future, to take out that morocco case\
      seemed crude. Yet, not to take it out left him there before her\
      with no preliminary excuse for coming. And in this dilemma he was\
      seized with impatience at all this paraphernalia of excuse and\
      justification. This was a scene\'97it could be nothing else, and he\
      must face it. He heard her voice, uncomfortably, pathetically\
      soft:\
\
      \'93Why have you come again? Didn\'92t you understand that I would\
      rather you did not?\'94\
\
      He noticed her clothes\'97a dark brown velvet corduroy, a sable boa,\
      a small round toque of the same. They suited her admirably. She\
      had money to spare for dress, evidently! He said abruptly:\
\
      \'93It\'92s your birthday. I brought you this,\'94 and he held out to her\
      the green morocco case.\
\
      \'93Oh! No-no!\'94\
\
      Soames pressed the clasp; the seven stones gleamed out on the\
      pale grey velvet.\
\
      \'93Why not?\'94 he said. \'93Just as a sign that you don\'92t bear me\
      ill-feeling any longer.\'94\
\
      \'93I couldn\'92t.\'94\
\
      Soames took it out of the case.\
\
      \'93Let me just see how it looks.\'94\
\
      She shrank back.\
\
      He followed, thrusting his hand with the brooch in it against the\
      front of her dress. She shrank again.\
\
      Soames dropped his hand.\
\
      \'93Irene,\'94 he said, \'93let bygones be bygones. If _I_ can, surely you\
      might. Let\'92s begin again, as if nothing had been. Won\'92t you?\'94 His\
      voice was wistful, and his eyes, resting on her face, had in them\
      a sort of supplication.\
\
      She, who was standing literally with her back against the wall,\
      gave a little gulp, and that was all her answer. Soames went on:\
\
      \'93Can you really want to live all your days half-dead in this\
      little hole? Come back to me, and I\'92ll give you all you want. You\
      shall live your own life; I swear it.\'94\
\
      He saw her face quiver ironically.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 he repeated, \'93but I mean it this time. I\'92ll only ask one\
      thing. I just want\'97I just want a son. Don\'92t look like that! I\
      want one. It\'92s hard.\'94 His voice had grown hurried, so that he\
      hardly knew it for his own, and twice he jerked his head back as\
      if struggling for breath. It was the sight of her eyes fixed on\
      him, dark with a sort of fascinated fright, which pulled him\
      together and changed that painful incoherence to anger.\
\
      \'93Is it so very unnatural?\'94 he said between his teeth, \'93Is it\
      unnatural to want a child from one\'92s own wife? You wrecked our\
      life and put this blight on everything. We go on only half alive,\
      and without any future. Is it so very unflattering to you that in\
      spite of everything I\'97I still want you for my wife? Speak, for\
      Goodness\'92 sake! do speak.\'94\
\
      Irene seemed to try, but did not succeed.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t want to frighten you,\'94 said Soames more gently. \'93Heaven\
      knows. I only want you to see that I can\'92t go on like this. I\
      want you back. I want you.\'94\
\
      Irene raised one hand and covered the lower part of her face, but\
      her eyes never moved from his, as though she trusted in them to\
      keep him at bay. And all those years, barren and bitter,\
      since\'97ah! when?\'97almost since he had first known her, surged up in\
      one great wave of recollection in Soames; and a spasm that for\
      his life he could not control constricted his face.\
\
      \'93It\'92s not too late,\'94 he said; \'93it\'92s not\'97if you\'92ll only believe\
      it.\'94\
\
      Irene uncovered her lips, and both her hands made a writhing\
      gesture in front of her breast. Soames seized them.\
\
      \'93Don\'92t!\'94 she said under her breath. But he stood holding on to\
      them, trying to stare into her eyes which did not waver. Then she\
      said quietly:\
\
      \'93I am alone here. You won\'92t behave again as you once behaved.\'94\
\
      Dropping her hands as though they had been hot irons, he turned\
      away. Was it possible that there could be such relentless\
      unforgiveness! Could that one act of violent possession be still\
      alive within her? Did it bar him thus utterly? And doggedly he\
      said, without looking up:\
\
      \'93I am not going till you\'92ve answered me. I am offering what few\
      men would bring themselves to offer, I want a\'97a reasonable\
      answer.\'94\
\
      And almost with surprise he heard her say:\
\
      \'93You can\'92t have a reasonable answer. Reason has nothing to do\
      with it. You can only have the brutal truth: I would rather die.\'94\
\
      Soames stared at her.\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 he said. And there intervened in him a sort of paralysis of\
      speech and movement, the kind of quivering which comes when a man\
      has received a deadly insult, and does not yet know how he is\
      going to take it, or rather what it is going to do with him.\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 he said again, \'93as bad as that? Indeed! You would rather\
      die. That\'92s pretty!\'94\
\
      \'93I am sorry. You wanted me to answer. I can\'92t help the truth, can\
      I?\'94\
\
      At that queer spiritual appeal Soames turned for relief to\
      actuality. He snapped the brooch back into its case and put it in\
      his pocket.\
\
      \'93The truth!\'94 he said; \'93there\'92s no such thing with women. It\'92s\
      nerves\'97nerves.\'94\
\
      He heard the whisper:\
\
      \'93Yes; nerves don\'92t lie. Haven\'92t you discovered that?\'94 He was\
      silent, obsessed by the thought: \'93I _will_ hate this woman. I\
      _will_ hate her.\'94 That was the trouble! If only he could! He shot\
      a glance at her who stood unmoving against the wall with her head\
      up and her hands clasped, for all the world as if she were going\
      to be shot. And he said quickly:\
\
      \'93I don\'92t believe a word of it. You have a lover. If you hadn\'92t,\
      you wouldn\'92t be such a\'97such a little idiot.\'94 He was conscious,\
      before the expression in her eyes, that he had uttered something\
      of a non-sequitur, and dropped back too abruptly into the verbal\
      freedom of his connubial days. He turned away to the door. But he\
      could not go out. Something within him\'97that most deep and secret\
      Forsyte quality, the impossibility of letting go, the\
      impossibility of seeing the fantastic and forlorn nature of his\
      own tenacity\'97prevented him. He turned about again, and there\
      stood, with his back against the door, as hers was against the\
      wall opposite, quite unconscious of anything ridiculous in this\
      separation by the whole width of the room.\
\
      \'93Do you ever think of anybody but yourself?\'94 he said.\
\
      Irene\'92s lips quivered; then she answered slowly:\
\
      \'93Do you ever think that I found out my mistake\'97my hopeless,\
      terrible mistake\'97the very first week of our marriage; that I went\
      on trying three years\'97you know I went on trying? Was it for\
      myself?\'94\
\
      Soames gritted his teeth. \'93God knows what it was. I\'92ve never\
      understood you; I shall never understand you. You had everything\
      you wanted; and you can have it again, and more. What\'92s the\
      matter with me? I ask you a plain question: What is it?\'94\
      Unconscious of the pathos in that enquiry, he went on\
      passionately: \'93I\'92m not lame, I\'92m not loathsome, I\'92m not a boor,\
      I\'92m not a fool. What is it? What\'92s the mystery about me?\'94\
\
      Her answer was a long sigh.\
\
      He clasped his hands with a gesture that for him was strangely\
      full of expression. \'93When I came here to-night I was\'97I hoped\'97I\
      meant everything that I could to do away with the past, and start\
      fair again. And you meet me with \'91nerves,\'92 and silence, and\
      sighs. There\'92s nothing tangible. It\'92s like\'97it\'92s like a spider\'92s\
      web.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      That whisper from across the room maddened Soames afresh.\
\
      \'93Well, I don\'92t choose to be in a spider\'92s web. I\'92ll cut it.\'94 He\
      walked straight up to her. \'93Now!\'94 What he had gone up to her to\
      do he really did not know. But when he was close, the old\
      familiar scent of her clothes suddenly affected him. He put his\
      hands on her shoulders and bent forward to kiss her. He kissed\
      not her lips, but a little hard line where the lips had been\
      drawn in; then his face was pressed away by her hands; he heard\
      her say: \'93Oh! No!\'94 Shame, compunction, sense of futility flooded\
      his whole being, he turned on his heel and went straight out.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER III VISIT TO IRENE\
\
\
      Jolyon found June waiting on the platform at Paddington. She had\
      received his telegram while at breakfast. Her abode\'97a studio and\
      two bedrooms in a St. John\'92s Wood garden\'97had been selected by her\
      for the complete independence which it guaranteed. Unwatched by\
      Mrs. Grundy, unhindered by permanent domestics, she could receive\
      lame ducks at any hour of day or night, and not seldom had a duck\
      without studio of its own made use of June\'92s. She enjoyed her\
      freedom, and possessed herself with a sort of virginal passion;\
      the warmth which she would have lavished on Bosinney, and of\
      which\'97given her Forsyte tenacity\'97he must surely have tired, she\
      now expended in championship of the underdogs and budding\
      \'93geniuses\'94 of the artistic world. She lived, in fact, to turn\
      ducks into the swans she believed they were. The very fervour of\
      her protection warped her judgments. But she was loyal and\
      liberal; her small eager hand was ever against the oppressions of\
      academic and commercial opinion, and though her income was\
      considerable, her bank balance was often a minus quantity.\
\
      She had come to Paddington Station heated in her soul by a visit\
      to Eric Cobbley. A miserable Gallery had refused to let that\
      straight-haired genius have his one-man show after all. Its\
      impudent manager, after visiting his studio, had expressed the\
      opinion that it would only be a \'93one-horse show from the selling\
      point of view.\'94 This crowning example of commercial cowardice\
      towards her favourite lame duck\'97and he so hard up, with a wife\
      and two children, that he had caused her account to be\
      overdrawn\'97was still making the blood glow in her small, resolute\
      face, and her red-gold hair to shine more than ever. She gave her\
      father a hug, and got into a cab with him, having as many fish to\
      fry with him as he with her. It became at once a question which\
      would fry them first.\
\
      Jolyon had reached the words: \'93My dear, I want you to come with\
      me,\'94 when, glancing at her face, he perceived by her blue eyes\
      moving from side to side\'97like the tail of a preoccupied cat\'97that\
      she was not attending. \'93Dad, is it true that I absolutely can\'92t\
      get at any of my money?\'94\
\
      \'93Only the income, fortunately, my love.\'94\
\
      \'93How perfectly beastly! Can\'92t it be done somehow? There must be a\
      way. I know I could buy a small Gallery for ten thousand pounds.\'94\
\
      \'93A small Gallery,\'94 murmured Jolyon, \'93seems a modest desire. But\
      your grandfather foresaw it.\'94\
\
      \'93I think,\'94 cried June vigorously, \'93that all this care about money\
      is awful, when there\'92s so much genius in the world simply crushed\
      out for want of a little. I shall never marry and have children;\
      why shouldn\'92t I be able to do some good instead of having it all\
      tied up in case of things which will never come off?\'94\
\
      \'93Our name is Forsyte, my dear,\'94 replied Jolyon in the ironical\
      voice to which his impetuous daughter had never quite grown\
      accustomed; \'93and Forsytes, you know, are people who so settle\
      their property that their grandchildren, in case they should die\
      before their parents, have to make wills leaving the property\
      that will only come to themselves when their parents die. Do you\
      follow that? Nor do I, but it\'92s a fact, anyway; we live by the\
      principle that so long as there is a possibility of keeping\
      wealth in the family it must not go out; if you die unmarried,\
      your money goes to Jolly and Holly and their children if they\
      marry. Isn\'92t it pleasant to know that whatever you do you can\
      none of you be destitute?\'94\
\
      \'93But can\'92t I borrow the money?\'94\
\
      Jolyon shook his head. \'93You could rent a Gallery, no doubt, if\
      you could manage it out of your income.\'94\
\
      June uttered a contemptuous sound.\
\
      \'93Yes; and have no income left to help anybody with.\'94\
\
      \'93My dear child,\'94 murmured Jolyon, \'93wouldn\'92t it come to the same\
      thing?\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said June shrewdly, \'93I could buy for ten thousand; that\
      would only be four hundred a year. But I should have to pay a\
      thousand a year rent, and that would only leave me five hundred.\
      If I had the Gallery, Dad, think what I could do. I could make\
      Eric Cobbley\'92s name in no time, and ever so many others.\'94\
\
      \'93Names worth making make themselves in time.\'94\
\
      \'93When they\'92re dead.\'94\
\
      \'93Did you ever know anybody living, my dear, improved by having\
      his name made?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, you,\'94 said June, pressing his arm.\
\
      Jolyon started. \'93I?\'94 he thought. \'93Oh! Ah! Now she\'92s going to ask\
      me to do something. We take it out, we Forsytes, each in our\
      different ways.\'94\
\
      June came closer to him in the cab.\
\
      \'93Darling,\'94 she said, \'93you buy the Gallery, and I\'92ll pay you four\
      hundred a year for it. Then neither of us will be any the worse\
      off. Besides, it\'92s a splendid investment.\'94\
\
      Jolyon wriggled. \'93Don\'92t you think,\'94 he said, \'93that for an artist\
      to buy a Gallery is a bit dubious? Besides, ten thousand pounds\
      is a lump, and I\'92m not a commercial character.\'94\
\
      June looked at him with admiring appraisement.\
\
      \'93Of course you\'92re not, but you\'92re awfully businesslike. And I\'92m\
      sure we could make it pay. It\'92ll be a perfect way of scoring off\
      those wretched dealers and people.\'94 And again she squeezed her\
      father\'92s arm.\
\
      Jolyon\'92s face expressed quizzical despair.\
\
      \'93Where is this desirable Gallery? Splendidly situated, I\
      suppose?\'94\
\
      \'93Just off Cork Street.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 thought Jolyon, \'93I knew it was just off somewhere. Now for\
      what I want out of _her!_\'94\
\
      \'93Well, I\'92ll think of it, but not just now. You remember Irene? I\
      want you to come with me and see her. Soames is after her again.\
      She might be safer if we could give her asylum somewhere.\'94\
\
      The word asylum, which he had used by chance, was of all most\
      calculated to rouse June\'92s interest.\
\
      \'93Irene! I haven\'92t seen her since! Of course! I\'92d love to help\
      her.\'94\
\
      It was Jolyon\'92s turn to squeeze her arm, in warm admiration for\
      this spirited, generous-hearted little creature of his begetting.\
\
      \'93Irene is proud,\'94 he said, with a sidelong glance, in sudden\
      doubt of June\'92s discretion; \'93she\'92s difficult to help. We must\
      tread gently. This is the place. I wired her to expect us. Let\'92s\
      send up our cards.\'94\
\
      \'93I can\'92t bear Soames,\'94 said June as she got out; \'93he sneers at\
      everything that isn\'92t successful.\'94\
\
      Irene was in what was called the \'93Ladies\'92 drawing-room\'94 of the\
      Piedmont Hotel.\
\
      Nothing if not morally courageous, June walked straight up to her\
      former friend, kissed her cheek, and the two settled down on a\
      sofa never sat on since the hotel\'92s foundation. Jolyon could see\
      that Irene was deeply affected by this simple forgiveness.\
\
      \'93So Soames has been worrying you?\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93I had a visit from him last night; he wants me to go back to\
      him.\'94\
\
      \'93You\'92re not going, of course?\'94 cried June.\
\
      Irene smiled faintly and shook her head. \'93But his position is\
      horrible,\'94 she murmured.\
\
      \'93It\'92s his own fault; he ought to have divorced you when he\
      could.\'94\
\
      Jolyon remembered how fervently in the old days June had hoped\
      that no divorce would smirch her dead and faithless lover\'92s name.\
\
      \'93Let us hear what Irene _is_ going to do,\'94 he said.\
\
      Irene\'92s lips quivered, but she spoke calmly.\
\
      \'93I\'92d better give him fresh excuse to get rid of me.\'94\
\
      \'93How horrible!\'94 cried June.\
\
      \'93What else can I do?\'94\
\
      \'93Out of the question,\'94 said Jolyon very quietly, \'93_sans amour_.\'94\
\
      He thought she was going to cry; but, getting up quickly, she\
      half turned her back on them, and stood regaining control of\
      herself.\
\
      June said suddenly:\
\
      \'93Well, I shall go to Soames and tell him he must leave you alone.\
      What does he want at his age?\'94\
\
      \'93A child. It\'92s not unnatural\'94\
\
      \'93A child!\'94 cried June scornfully. \'93Of course! To leave his money\
      to. If he wants one badly enough let him take somebody and have\
      one; then you can divorce him, and he can marry her.\'94\
\
      Jolyon perceived suddenly that he had made a mistake to bring\
      June\'97her violent partizanship was fighting Soames\'92 battle.\
\
      \'93It would be best for Irene to come quietly to us at Robin Hill,\
      and see how things shape.\'94\
\
      \'93Of course,\'94 said June; \'93only....\'94\
\
      Irene looked full at Jolyon\'97in all his many attempts afterwards\
      to analyze that glance he never could succeed.\
\
      \'93No! I should only bring trouble on you all. I will go abroad.\'94\
\
      He knew from her voice that this was final. The irrelevant\
      thought flashed through him: \'93Well, I could see her there.\'94 But\
      he said:\
\
      \'93Don\'92t you think you would be more helpless abroad, in case he\
      followed?\'94\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know. I can but try.\'94\
\
      June sprang up and paced the room. \'93It\'92s all horrible,\'94 she said.\
      \'93Why should people be tortured and kept miserable and helpless\
      year after year by this disgusting sanctimonious law?\'94 But\
      someone had come into the room, and June came to a standstill.\
      Jolyon went up to Irene:\
\
      \'93Do you want money?\'94\
\
      \'93No.\'94\
\
      \'93And would you like me to let your flat?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, Jolyon, please.\'94\
\
      \'93When shall you be going?\'94\
\
      \'93To-morrow.\'94\
\
      \'93You won\'92t go back there in the meantime, will you?\'94 This he said\
      with an anxiety strange to himself.\
\
      \'93No; I\'92ve got all I want here.\'94\
\
      \'93You\'92ll send me your address?\'94\
\
      She put out her hand to him. \'93I feel you\'92re a rock.\'94\
\
      \'93Built on sand,\'94 answered Jolyon, pressing her hand hard; \'93but\
      it\'92s a pleasure to do anything, at any time, remember that. And\
      if you change your mind...! Come along, June; say good-bye.\'94\
\
      June came from the window and flung her arms round Irene.\
\
      \'93Don\'92t think of him,\'94 she said under her breath; \'93enjoy yourself,\
      and bless you!\'94\
\
      With a memory of tears in Irene\'92s eyes, and of a smile on her\
      lips, they went away extremely silent, passing the lady who had\
      interrupted the interview and was turning over the papers on the\
      table.\
\
      Opposite the National Gallery June exclaimed:\
\
      \'93Of all undignified beasts and horrible laws!\'94\
\
      But Jolyon did not respond. He had something of his father\'92s\
      balance, and could see things impartially even when his emotions\
      were roused. Irene was right; Soames\'92 position was as bad or\
      worse than her own. As for the law\'97it catered for a human nature\
      of which it took a naturally low view. And, feeling that if he\
      stayed in his daughter\'92s company he would in one way or another\
      commit an indiscretion, he told her he must catch his train back\
      to Oxford; and hailing a cab, left her to Turner\'92s water-colours,\
      with the promise that he would think over that Gallery.\
\
      But he thought over Irene instead. Pity, they said, was akin to\
      love! If so he was certainly in danger of loving her, for he\
      pitied her profoundly. To think of her drifting about Europe so\
      handicapped and lonely! \'93I hope to goodness she\'92ll keep her\
      head!\'94 he thought; \'93she might easily grow desperate.\'94 In fact,\
      now that she had cut loose from her poor threads of occupation,\
      he couldn\'92t imagine how she would go on\'97so beautiful a creature,\
      hopeless, and fair game for anyone! In his exasperation was more\
      than a little fear and jealousy. Women did strange things when\
      they were driven into corners. \'93I wonder what Soames will do\
      now!\'94 he thought. \'93A rotten, idiotic state of things! And I\
      suppose they would say it was her own fault.\'94 Very preoccupied\
      and sore at heart, he got into his train, mislaid his ticket, and\
      on the platform at Oxford took his hat off to a lady whose face\
      he seemed to remember without being able to put a name to her,\
      not even when he saw her having tea at the Rainbow.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER IV WHERE FORSYTES FEAR TO TREAD\
\
\
      Quivering from the defeat of his hopes, with the green morocco\
      case still flat against his heart, Soames revolved thoughts\
      bitter as death. A spider\'92s web! Walking fast, and noting nothing\
      in the moonlight, he brooded over the scene he had been through,\
      over the memory of her figure rigid in his grasp. And the more he\
      brooded, the more certain he became that she had a lover\'97her\
      words, \'93I would sooner die!\'94 were ridiculous if she had not. Even\
      if she had never loved him, she had made no fuss until Bosinney\
      came on the scene. No; she was in love again, or she would not\
      have made that melodramatic answer to his proposal, which in all\
      the circumstances was reasonable! Very well! That simplified\
      matters.\
\
      \'93I\'92ll take steps to know where I am,\'94 he thought; \'93I\'92ll go to\
      Polteed\'92s the first thing tomorrow morning.\'94\
\
      But even in forming that resolution he knew he would have trouble\
      with himself. He had employed Polteed\'92s agency several times in\
      the routine of his profession, even quite lately over Dartie\'92s\
      case, but he had never thought it possible to employ them to\
      watch his own wife.\
\
      It was too insulting to himself!\
\
      He slept over that project and his wounded pride\'97or rather, kept\
      vigil. Only while shaving did he suddenly remember that she\
      called herself by her maiden name of Heron. Polteed would not\
      know, at first at all events, whose wife she was, would not look\
      at him obsequiously and leer behind his back. She would just be\
      the wife of one of his clients. And that would be true\'97for was he\
      not his own solicitor?\
\
      He was literally afraid not to put his design into execution at\
      the first possible moment, lest, after all, he might fail\
      himself. And making Warmson bring him an early cup of coffee; he\
      stole out of the house before the hour of breakfast. He walked\
      rapidly to one of those small West End streets where Polteed\'92s\
      and other firms ministered to the virtues of the wealthier\
      classes. Hitherto he had always had Polteed to see him in the\
      Poultry; but he well knew their address, and reached it at the\
      opening hour. In the outer office, a room furnished so cosily\
      that it might have been a money-lender\'92s, he was attended by a\
      lady who might have been a schoolmistress.\
\
      \'93I wish to see Mr. Claud Polteed. He knows me\'97never mind my\
      name.\'94\
\
      To keep everybody from knowing that he, Soames Forsyte, was\
      reduced to having his wife spied on, was the overpowering\
      consideration.\
\
      Mr. Claud Polteed\'97so different from Mr. Lewis Polteed\'97was one of\
      those men with dark hair, slightly curved noses, and quick brown\
      eyes, who might be taken for Jews but are really Ph\'9cnicians; he\
      received Soames in a room hushed by thickness of carpet and\
      curtains. It was, in fact, confidentially furnished, without\
      trace of document anywhere to be seen.\
\
      Greeting Soames deferentially, he turned the key in the only door\
      with a certain ostentation.\
\
      \'93If a client sends for me,\'94 he was in the habit of saying, \'93he\
      takes what precaution he likes. If he comes here, we convince him\
      that we have no leakages. I may safely say we lead in security,\
      if in nothing else....Now, sir, what can I do for you?\'94\
\
      Soames\'92 gorge had risen so that he could hardly speak. It was\
      absolutely necessary to hide from this man that he had any but\
      professional interest in the matter; and, mechanically, his face\
      assumed its sideway smile.\
\
      \'93I\'92ve come to you early like this because there\'92s not an hour to\
      lose\'94\'97if he lost an hour he might fail himself yet! \'93Have you a\
      really trustworthy woman free?\'94\
\
      Mr. Polteed unlocked a drawer, produced a memorandum, ran his\
      eyes over it, and locked the drawer up again.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 he said; \'93the very woman.\'94\
\
      Soames had seated himself and crossed his legs\'97nothing but a\
      faint flush, which might have been his normal complexion,\
      betrayed him.\
\
      \'93Send her off at once, then, to watch a Mrs. Irene Heron of Flat\
      C, Truro Mansions, Chelsea, till further notice.\'94\
\
      \'93Precisely,\'94 said Mr. Polteed; \'93divorce, I presume?\'94 and he blew\
      into a speaking-tube. \'93Mrs. Blanch in? I shall want to speak to\
      her in ten minutes.\'94\
\
      \'93Deal with any reports yourself,\'94 resumed Soames, \'93and send them\
      to me personally, marked confidential, sealed and registered. My\
      client exacts the utmost secrecy.\'94\
\
      Mr. Polteed smiled, as though saying, \'93You are teaching your\
      grandmother, my dear sir;\'94 and his eyes slid over Soames\'92 face\
      for one unprofessional instant.\
\
      \'93Make his mind perfectly easy,\'94 he said. \'93Do you smoke?\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Soames. \'93Understand me: Nothing may come of this. If a\
      name gets out, or the watching is suspected, it may have very\
      serious consequences.\'94\
\
      Mr. Polteed nodded. \'93I can put it into the cipher category. Under\
      that system a name is never mentioned; we work by numbers.\'94\
\
      He unlocked another drawer and took out two slips of paper, wrote\
      on them, and handed one to Soames.\
\
      \'93Keep that, sir; it\'92s your key. I retain this duplicate. The case\
      we\'92ll call 7x. The party watched will be 17; the watcher 19; the\
      Mansions 25; yourself\'97I should say, your firm\'9731; my firm 32,\
      myself 2. In case you should have to mention your client in\
      writing I have called him 43; any person we suspect will be 47; a\
      second person 51. Any special hint or instruction while we\'92re\
      about it?\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Soames; \'93that is\'97every consideration compatible.\'94\
\
      Again Mr. Polteed nodded. \'93Expense?\'94\
\
      Soames shrugged. \'93In reason,\'94 he answered curtly, and got up.\
      \'93Keep it entirely in your own hands.\'94\
\
      \'93Entirely,\'94 said Mr. Polteed, appearing suddenly between him and\
      the door. \'93I shall be seeing you in that other case before long.\
      Good morning, sir.\'94 His eyes slid unprofessionally over Soames\
      once more, and he unlocked the door.\
\
      \'93Good morning,\'94 said Soames, looking neither to right nor left.\
\
      Out in the street he swore deeply, quietly, to himself. A\
      spider\'92s web, and to cut it he must use this spidery, secret,\
      unclean method, so utterly repugnant to one who regarded his\
      private life as his most sacred piece of property. But the die\
      was cast, he could not go back. And he went on into the Poultry,\
      and locked away the green morocco case and the key to that cipher\
      destined to make crystal-clear his domestic bankruptcy.\
\
      Odd that one whose life was spent in bringing to the public eye\
      all the private coils of property, the domestic disagreements of\
      others, should dread so utterly the public eye turned on his own;\
      and yet not odd, for who should know so well as he the whole\
      unfeeling process of legal regulation.\
\
      He worked hard all day. Winifred was due at four o\'92clock; he was\
      to take her down to a conference in the Temple with Dreamer Q.C.,\
      and waiting for her he re-read the letter he had caused her to\
      write the day of Dartie\'92s departure, requiring him to return.\
\
      \'93DEAR MONTAGUE,\
          \'93I have received your letter with the news that you have left\
          me for ever and are on your way to Buenos Aires. It has\
          naturally been a great shock. I am taking this earliest\
          opportunity of writing to tell you that I am prepared to let\
          bygones be bygones if you will return to me at once. I beg\
          you to do so. I am very much upset, and will not say any more\
          now. I am sending this letter registered to the address you\
          left at your Club. Please cable to me.\
\
      \'93Your still affectionate wife,\
      \'93WINIFRED DARTIE.\'94\
\
      Ugh! What bitter humbug! He remembered leaning over Winifred\
      while she copied what he had pencilled, and how she had said,\
      laying down her pen, \'93Suppose he comes, Soames!\'94 in such a\
      strange tone of voice, as if she did not know her own mind. \'93He\
      won\'92t come,\'94 he had answered, \'93till he\'92s spent his money. That\'92s\
      why we must act at once.\'94 Annexed to the copy of that letter was\
      the original of Dartie\'92s drunken scrawl from the Iseeum Club.\
      Soames could have wished it had not been so manifestly penned in\
      liquor. Just the sort of thing the Court would pitch on. He\
      seemed to hear the Judge\'92s voice say: \'93You took this seriously!\
      Seriously enough to write him as you did? Do you think he meant\
      it?\'94 Never mind! The fact was clear that Dartie had sailed and\
      had not returned. Annexed also was his cabled answer: \'93Impossible\
      return. Dartie.\'94 Soames shook his head. If the whole thing were\
      not disposed of within the next few months the fellow would turn\
      up again like a bad penny. It saved a thousand a year at least to\
      get rid of him, besides all the worry to Winifred and his father.\
      \'93I must stiffen Dreamer\'92s back,\'94 he thought; \'93we must push it\
      on.\'94\
\
      Winifred, who had adopted a kind of half-mourning which became\
      her fair hair and tall figure very well, arrived in James\'92\
      barouche drawn by James\'92 pair. Soames had not seen it in the City\
      since his father retired from business five years ago, and its\
      incongruity gave him a shock. \'93Times are changing,\'94 he thought;\
      \'93one doesn\'92t know what\'92ll go next!\'94 Top hats even were scarcer.\
      He enquired after Val. Val, said Winifred, wrote that he was\
      going to play polo next term. She thought he was in a very good\
      set. She added with fashionably disguised anxiety: \'93Will there be\
      much publicity about my affair, Soames? _Must_ it be in the\
      papers? It\'92s so bad for him, and the girls.\'94\
\
      With his own calamity all raw within him, Soames answered:\
\
      \'93The papers are a pushing lot; it\'92s very difficult to keep things\
      out. They pretend to be guarding the public\'92s morals, and they\
      corrupt them with their beastly reports. But we haven\'92t got to\
      that yet. We\'92re only seeing Dreamer to-day on the restitution\
      question. Of course he understands that it\'92s to lead to a\
      divorce; but you must seem genuinely anxious to get Dartie\
      back\'97you might practise that attitude to-day.\'94\
\
      Winifred sighed.\
\
      \'93Oh! What a clown Monty\'92s been!\'94 she said.\
\
      Soames gave her a sharp look. It was clear to him that she could\
      not take her Dartie seriously, and would go back on the whole\
      thing if given half a chance. His own instinct had been firm in\
      this matter from the first. To save a little scandal now would\
      only bring on his sister and her children real disgrace and\
      perhaps ruin later on if Dartie were allowed to hang on to them,\
      going down-hill and spending the money James would leave his\
      daughter. Though it _was_ all tied up, that fellow would milk the\
      settlements somehow, and make his family pay through the nose to\
      keep him out of bankruptcy or even perhaps gaol! They left the\
      shining carriage, with the shining horses and the shining-hatted\
      servants on the Embankment, and walked up to Dreamer Q.C.\'92s\
      Chambers in Crown Office Row.\
\
      \'93Mr. Bellby is here, sir,\'94 said the clerk; \'93Mr. Dreamer will be\
      ten minutes.\'94\
\
      Mr. Bellby, the junior\'97not as junior as he might have been, for\
      Soames only employed barristers of established reputation; it\
      was, indeed, something of a mystery to him how barristers ever\
      managed to establish that which made him employ them\'97Mr. Bellby\
      was seated, taking a final glance through his papers. He had come\
      from Court, and was in wig and gown, which suited a nose jutting\
      out like the handle of a tiny pump, his small shrewd blue eyes,\
      and rather protruding lower lip\'97no better man to supplement and\
      stiffen Dreamer.\
\
      The introduction to Winifred accomplished, they leaped the\
      weather and spoke of the war. Soames interrupted suddenly:\
\
      \'93If he doesn\'92t comply we can\'92t bring proceedings for six months.\
      I want to get on with the matter, Bellby.\'94\
\
      Mr. Bellby, who had the ghost of an Irish brogue, smiled at\
      Winifred and murmured: \'93The Law\'92s delays, Mrs. Dartie.\'94\
\
      \'93Six months!\'94 repeated Soames; \'93it\'92ll drive it up to June! We\
      shan\'92t get the suit on till after the long vacation. We must put\
      the screw on, Bellby\'94\'97he would have all his work cut out to keep\
      Winifred up to the scratch.\
\
      \'93Mr. Dreamer will see you now, sir.\'94\
\
      They filed in, Mr. Bellby going first, and Soames escorting\
      Winifred after an interval of one minute by his watch.\
\
      Dreamer Q.C., in a gown but divested of wig, was standing before\
      the fire, as if this conference were in the nature of a treat; he\
      had the leathery, rather oily complexion which goes with great\
      learning, a considerable nose with glasses perched on it, and\
      little greyish whiskers; he luxuriated in the perpetual cocking\
      of one eye, and the concealment of his lower with his upper lip,\
      which gave a smothered turn to his speech. He had a way, too, of\
      coming suddenly round the corner on the person he was talking to;\
      this, with a disconcerting tone of voice, and a habit of growling\
      before he began to speak\'97had secured a reputation second in\
      Probate and Divorce to very few. Having listened, eye cocked, to\
      Mr. Bellby\'92s breezy recapitulation of the facts, he growled, and\
      said:\
\
      \'93I know all that;\'94 and coming round the corner at Winifred,\
      smothered the words:\
\
      \'93We want to get him back, don\'92t we, Mrs. Dartie?\'94\
\
      Soames interposed sharply:\
\
      \'93My sister\'92s position, of course, is intolerable.\'94\
\
      Dreamer growled. \'93Exactly. Now, can we rely on the cabled\
      refusal, or must we wait till after Christmas to give him a\
      chance to have written\'97that\'92s the point, isn\'92t it?\'94\
\
      \'93The sooner....\'94 Soames began.\
\
      \'93What do you say, Bellby?\'94 said Dreamer, coming round his corner.\
\
      Mr. Bellby seemed to sniff the air like a hound.\
\
      \'93We won\'92t be on till the middle of December. We\'92ve no need to\
      give um more rope than that.\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Soames, \'93why should my sister be incommoded by his\
      choosing to go...\'94\
\
      \'93To Jericho!\'94 said Dreamer, again coming round his corner; \'93quite\
      so. People oughtn\'92t to go to Jericho, ought they, Mrs. Dartie?\'94\
      And he raised his gown into a sort of fantail. \'93I agree. We can\
      go forward. Is there anything more?\'94\
\
      \'93Nothing at present,\'94 said Soames meaningly; \'93I wanted you to see\
      my sister.\'94\
\
      Dreamer growled softly: \'93Delighted. Good evening!\'94 And let fall\
      the protection of his gown.\
\
      They filed out. Winifred went down the stairs. Soames lingered.\
      In spite of himself he was impressed by Dreamer.\
\
      \'93The evidence is all right, I think,\'94 he said to Bellby. \'93Between\
      ourselves, if we don\'92t get the thing through quick, we never may.\
      D\'92you think _he_ understands that?\'94\
\
      \'93I\'92ll make um,\'94 said Bellby. \'93Good man though\'97good man.\'94\
\
      Soames nodded and hastened after his sister. He found her in a\
      draught, biting her lips behind her veil, and at once said:\
\
      \'93The evidence of the stewardess will be very complete.\'94\
\
      Winifred\'92s face hardened; she drew herself up, and they walked to\
      the carriage. And, all through that silent drive back to Green\
      Street, the souls of both of them revolved a single thought:\
      \'93Why, oh! why should I have to expose my misfortune to the public\
      like this? Why have to employ spies to peer into my private\
      troubles? They were not of my making.\'94\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER V JOLLY SITS IN JUDGMENT\
\
\
      The possessive instinct, which, so determinedly balked, was\
      animating two members of the Forsyte family towards riddance of\
      what they could no longer possess, was hardening daily in the\
      British body politic. Nicholas, originally so doubtful concerning\
      a war which must affect property, had been heard to say that\
      these Boers were a pig-headed lot; they were causing a lot of\
      expense, and the sooner they had their lesson the better. _He_\
      would send out Wolseley! Seeing always a little further than\
      other people\'97whence the most considerable fortune of all the\
      Forsytes\'97he had perceived already that Buller was not the man\'97\'93a\
      bull of a chap, who just went butting, and if they didn\'92t look\
      out Ladysmith would fall.\'94 This was early in December, so that\
      when Black Week came, he was enabled to say to everybody: \'93I told\
      you so.\'94 During that week of gloom such as no Forsyte could\
      remember, very young Nicholas attended so many drills in his\
      corps, \'93The Devil\'92s Own,\'94 that young Nicholas consulted the\
      family physician about his son\'92s health and was alarmed to find\
      that he was perfectly sound. The boy had only just eaten his\
      dinners and been called to the bar, at some expense, and it was\
      in a way a nightmare to his father and mother that he should be\
      playing with military efficiency at a time when military\
      efficiency in the civilian population might conceivably be\
      wanted. His grandfather, of course, pooh-poohed the notion, too\
      thoroughly educated in the feeling that no British war could be\
      other than little and professional, and profoundly distrustful of\
      Imperial commitments, by which, moreover, he stood to lose, for\
      he owned De Beers, now going down fast, more than a sufficient\
      sacrifice on the part of his grandson.\
\
      At Oxford, however, rather different sentiments prevailed. The\
      inherent effervescence of conglomerate youth had, during the two\
      months of the term before Black Week, been gradually\
      crystallising out into vivid oppositions. Normal adolescence,\
      ever in England of a conservative tendency though not taking\
      things too seriously, was vehement for a fight to a finish and a\
      good licking for the Boers. Of this larger faction Val Dartie was\
      naturally a member. Radical youth, on the other hand, a small but\
      perhaps more vocal body, was for stopping the war and giving the\
      Boers autonomy. Until Black Week, however, the groups were\
      amorphous, without sharp edges, and argument remained but\
      academic. Jolly was one of those who knew not where he stood. A\
      streak of his grandfather old Jolyon\'92s love of justice prevented,\
      him from seeing one side only. Moreover, in his set of \'93the best\'94\
      there was a \'93jumping-Jesus\'94 of extremely advanced opinions and\
      some personal magnetism. Jolly wavered. His father, too, seemed\
      doubtful in his views. And though, as was proper at the age of\
      twenty, he kept a sharp eye on his father, watchful for defects\
      which might still be remedied, still that father had an \'93air\'94\
      which gave a sort of glamour to his creed of ironic tolerance.\
      Artists, of course, were notoriously Hamlet-like, and to this\
      extent one must discount for one\'92s father, even if one loved him.\
      But Jolyon\'92s original view, that to \'93put your nose in where you\
      aren\'92t wanted\'94 (as the Uitlanders had done) \'93and then work the\
      oracle till you get on top is not being quite the clean potato,\'94\
      had, whether founded in fact or no, a certain attraction for his\
      son, who thought a deal about gentility. On the other hand Jolly\
      could not abide such as his set called \'93cranks,\'94 and Val\'92s set\
      called \'93smugs,\'94 so that he was still balancing when the clock of\
      Black Week struck. One\'97two\'97three, came those ominous repulses at\
      Stormberg, Magersfontein, Colenso. The sturdy English soul\
      reacting after the first cried, \'93Ah! but Methuen!\'94 after the\
      second: \'93Ah! but Buller!\'94 then, in inspissated gloom, hardened.\
      And Jolly said to himself: \'93No, damn it! We\'92ve got to lick the\
      beggars now; I don\'92t care whether we\'92re right or wrong.\'94 And, if\
      he had known it, his father was thinking the same thought.\
\
      That next Sunday, last of the term, Jolly was bidden to wine with\
      \'93one of the best.\'94 After the second toast, \'93Buller and damnation\
      to the Boers,\'94 drunk\'97no heel taps\'97in the college Burgundy, he\
      noticed that Val Dartie, also a guest, was looking at him with a\
      grin and saying something to his neighbour. He was sure it was\
      disparaging. The last boy in the world to make himself\
      conspicuous or cause public disturbance, Jolly grew rather red\
      and shut his lips. The queer hostility he had always felt towards\
      his second-cousin was strongly and suddenly reinforced. \'93All\
      right!\'94 he thought, \'93you wait, my friend!\'94 More wine than was\
      good for him, as the custom was, helped him to remember, when\
      they all trooped forth to a secluded spot, to touch Val on the\
      arm.\
\
      \'93What did you say about me in there?\'94\
\
      \'93Mayn\'92t I say what I like?\'94\
\
      \'93No.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, I said you were a pro-Boer\'97and so you are!\'94\
\
      \'93You\'92re a liar!\'94\
\
      \'93D\'92you want a row?\'94\
\
      \'93Of course, but not here; in the garden.\'94\
\
      \'93All right. Come on.\'94\
\
      They went, eyeing each other askance, unsteady, and unflinching;\
      they climbed the garden railings. The spikes on the top slightly\
      ripped Val\'92s sleeve, and occupied his mind. Jolly\'92s mind was\
      occupied by the thought that they were going to fight in the\
      precincts of a college foreign to them both. It was not the\
      thing, but never mind\'97the young beast!\
\
      They passed over the grass into very nearly darkness, and took\
      off their coats.\
\
      \'93You\'92re not screwed, are you?\'94 said Jolly suddenly. \'93I can\'92t\
      fight you if you\'92re screwed.\'94\
\
      \'93No more than you.\'94\
\
      \'93All right then.\'94\
\
      Without shaking hands, they put themselves at once into postures\
      of defence. They had drunk too much for science, and so were\
      especially careful to assume correct attitudes, until Jolly smote\
      Val almost accidentally on the nose. After that it was all a dark\
      and ugly scrimmage in the deep shadow of the old trees, with no\
      one to call \'93time,\'94 till, battered and blown, they unclinched and\
      staggered back from each other, as a voice said:\
\
      \'93Your names, young gentlemen?\'94\
\
      At this bland query spoken from under the lamp at the garden\
      gate, like some demand of a god, their nerves gave way, and\
      snatching up their coats, they ran at the railings, shinned up\
      them, and made for the secluded spot whence they had issued to\
      the fight. Here, in dim light, they mopped their faces, and\
      without a word walked, ten paces apart, to the college gate. They\
      went out silently, Val going towards the Broad along the Brewery,\
      Jolly down the lane towards the High. His head, still fumed, was\
      busy with regret that he had not displayed more science, passing\
      in review the counters and knockout blows which he had not\
      delivered. His mind strayed on to an imagined combat, infinitely\
      unlike that which he had just been through, infinitely gallant,\
      with sash and sword, with thrust and parry, as if he were in the\
      pages of his beloved Dumas. He fancied himself La Mole, and\
      Aramis, Bussy, Chicot, and D\'92Artagnan rolled into one, but he\
      quite failed to envisage Val as Coconnas, Brissac, or Rochefort.\
      The fellow was just a confounded cousin who didn\'92t come up to\
      Cocker. Never mind! He had given him one or two. \'93Pro-Boer!\'94 The\
      word still rankled, and thoughts of enlisting jostled his aching\
      head; of riding over the veldt, firing gallantly, while the Boers\
      rolled over like rabbits. And, turning up his smarting eyes, he\
      saw the stars shining between the housetops of the High, and\
      himself lying out on the Karoo (whatever that was) rolled in a\
      blanket, with his rifle ready and his gaze fixed on a glittering\
      heaven.\
\
      He had a fearful \'93head\'94 next morning, which he doctored, as\
      became one of \'93the best,\'94 by soaking it in cold water, brewing\
      strong coffee which he could not drink, and only sipping a little\
      Hock at lunch. The legend that \'93some fool\'94 had run into him round\
      a corner accounted for a bruise on his cheek. He would on no\
      account have mentioned the fight, for, on second thoughts, it\
      fell far short of his standards.\
\
      The next day he went \'93down,\'94 and travelled through to Robin Hill.\
      Nobody was there but June and Holly, for his father had gone to\
      Paris. He spent a restless and unsettled Vacation, quite out of\
      touch with either of his sisters. June, indeed, was occupied with\
      lame ducks, whom, as a rule, Jolly could not stand, especially\
      that Eric Cobbley and his family, \'93hopeless outsiders,\'94 who were\
      always littering up the house in the Vacation. And between Holly\
      and himself there was a strange division, as if she were\
      beginning to have opinions of her own, which was so\'97unnecessary.\
      He punched viciously at a ball, rode furiously but alone in\
      Richmond Park, making a point of jumping the stiff, high hurdles\
      put up to close certain worn avenues of grass\'97keeping his nerve\
      in, he called it. Jolly was more afraid of being afraid than most\
      boys are. He bought a rifle, too, and put a range up in the home\
      field, shooting across the pond into the kitchen-garden wall, to\
      the peril of gardeners, with the thought that some day, perhaps,\
      he would enlist and save South Africa for his country. In fact,\
      now that they were appealing for Yeomanry recruits the boy was\
      thoroughly upset. Ought he to go? None of \'93the best,\'94 so far as\
      he knew\'97and he was in correspondence with several\'97were thinking\
      of joining. If they _had_ been making a move he would have gone\
      at once\'97very competitive, and with a strong sense of form, he\
      could not bear to be left behind in anything\'97but to do it off his\
      own bat might look like \'93swagger\'94. because of course it wasn\'92t\
      really necessary. Besides, he did not want to go, for the other\
      side of this young Forsyte recoiled from leaping before he\
      looked. It was altogether mixed pickles within him, hot and\
      sickly pickles, and he became quite unlike his serene and rather\
      lordly self.\
\
      And then one day he saw that which moved him to uneasy wrath\'97two\
      riders, in a glade of the Park close to the Ham Gate, of whom she\
      on the left-hand was most assuredly Holly on her silver roan, and\
      he on the right-hand as assuredly that \'93squirt\'94 Val Dartie. His\
      first impulse was to urge on his own horse and demand the meaning\
      of this portent, tell the fellow to \'93bunk,\'94 and take Holly home.\
      His second\'97to feel that he would look a fool if they refused. He\
      reined his horse in behind a tree, then perceived that it was\
      equally impossible to spy on them. Nothing for it but to go home\
      and await her coming! Sneaking out with that young bounder! He\
      could not consult with June, because she had gone up that morning\
      in the train of Eric Cobbley and his lot. And his father was\
      still in \'93that rotten Paris.\'94 He felt that this was emphatically\
      one of those moments for which he had trained himself,\
      assiduously, at school, where he and a boy called Brent had\
      frequently set fire to newspapers and placed them in the centre\
      of their studies to accustom them to coolness in moments of\
      danger. He did not feel at all cool waiting in the stable-yard,\
      idly stroking the dog Balthasar, who queasy as an old fat monk,\
      and sad in the absence of his master, turned up his face, panting\
      with gratitude for this attention. It was half an hour before\
      Holly came, flushed and ever so much prettier than she had any\
      right to look. He saw her look at him quickly\'97guiltily of\
      course\'97then followed her in, and, taking her arm, conducted her\
      into what had been their grandfather\'92s study. The room, not much\
      used now, was still vaguely haunted for them both by a presence\
      with which they associated tenderness, large drooping white\
      moustaches, the scent of cigar smoke, and laughter. Here Jolly,\
      in the prime of his youth, before he went to school at all, had\
      been wont to wrestle with his grandfather, who even at eighty had\
      an irresistible habit of crooking his leg. Here Holly, perched on\
      the arm of the great leather chair, had stroked hair curving\
      silvery over an ear into which she would whisper secrets. Through\
      that window they had all three sallied times without number to\
      cricket on the lawn, and a mysterious game called \'93Wopsy-doozle,\'94\
      not to be understood by outsiders, which made old Jolyon very\
      hot. Here once on a warm night Holly had appeared in her\
      \'93nighty,\'94 having had a bad dream, to have the clutch of it\
      released. And here Jolly, having begun the day badly by\
      introducing fizzy magnesia into Mademoiselle Beauce\'92s new-laid\
      egg, and gone on to worse, had been sent down (in the absence of\
      his father) to the ensuing dialogue:\
\
      \'93Now, my boy, you mustn\'92t go on like this.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, she boxed my ears, Gran, so I only boxed hers, and then\
      she boxed mine again.\'94\
\
      \'93Strike a lady? That\'92ll never do! Have you begged her pardon?\'94\
\
      \'93Not yet.\'94\
\
      \'93Then you must go and do it at once. Come along.\'94\
\
      \'93But she began it, Gran; and she had two to my one.\'94\
\
      \'93My dear, it was an outrageous thing to do.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, she lost her temper; and I didn\'92t lose mine.\'94\
\
      \'93Come along.\'94\
\
      \'93You come too, then, Gran.\'94\
\
      \'93Well\'97this time only.\'94\
\
      And they had gone hand in hand.\
\
      Here\'97where the Waverley novels and Byron\'92s works and Gibbon\'92s\
      _Roman Empire_ and Humboldt\'92s _Cosmos_, and the bronzes on the\
      mantelpiece, and that masterpiece of the oily school, \'93Dutch\
      Fishing-Boats at Sunset,\'94 were fixed as fate, and for all sign of\
      change old Jolyon might have been sitting there still, with legs\
      crossed, in the arm chair, and domed forehead and deep eyes grave\
      above _The Times_\'97here they came, those two grandchildren. And\
      Jolly said:\
\
      \'93I saw you and that fellow in the Park.\'94\
\
      The sight of blood rushing into her cheeks gave him some\
      satisfaction; she _ought_ to be ashamed!\
\
      \'93Well?\'94 she said.\
\
      Jolly was surprised; he had expected more, or less.\
\
      \'93Do you know,\'94 he said weightily, \'93that he called me a pro-Boer\
      last term? And I had to fight him.\'94\
\
      \'93Who won?\'94\
\
      Jolly wished to answer: \'93I should have,\'94 but it seemed beneath\
      him.\
\
      \'93Look here!\'94 he said, \'93what\'92s the meaning of it? Without telling\
      anybody!\'94\
\
      \'93Why should I? Dad isn\'92t here; why shouldn\'92t I ride with him?\'94\
\
      \'93You\'92ve got me to ride with. I think he\'92s an awful young rotter.\'94\
\
      Holly went pale with anger.\
\
      \'93He isn\'92t. It\'92s your own fault for not liking him.\'94\
\
      And slipping past her brother she went out, leaving him staring\
      at the bronze Venus sitting on a tortoise, which had been\
      shielded from him so far by his sister\'92s dark head under her soft\
      felt riding hat. He felt queerly disturbed, shaken to his young\
      foundations. A lifelong domination lay shattered round his feet.\
      He went up to the Venus and mechanically inspected the tortoise.\
\
      Why didn\'92t he like Val Dartie? He could not tell. Ignorant of\
      family history, barely aware of that vague feud which had started\
      thirteen years before with Bosinney\'92s defection from June in\
      favour of Soames\'92 wife, knowing really almost nothing about Val\
      he was at sea. He just _did_ dislike him. The question, however,\
      was: What should he do? Val Dartie, it was true, was a\
      second-cousin, but it was not the thing for Holly to go about\
      with him. And yet to \'93tell\'94 of what he had chanced on was against\
      his creed. In this dilemma he went and sat in the old leather\
      chair and crossed his legs. It grew dark while he sat there\
      staring out through the long window at the old oak-tree, ample\
      yet bare of leaves, becoming slowly just a shape of deeper dark\
      printed on the dusk.\
\
      \'93Grandfather!\'94 he thought without sequence, and took out his\
      watch. He could not see the hands, but he set the repeater going.\
      \'93Five o\'92clock!\'94 His grandfather\'92s first gold hunter watch,\
      butter-smooth with age\'97all the milling worn from it, and dented\
      with the mark of many a fall. The chime was like a little voice\
      from out of that golden age, when they first came from St. John\'92s\
      Wood, London, to this house\'97came driving with grandfather in his\
      carriage, and almost instantly took to the trees. Trees to climb,\
      and grandfather watering the geranium-beds below! What was to be\
      done? Tell Dad he must come home? Confide in June?\'97only she was\
      so\'97so sudden! Do nothing and trust to luck? After all, the Vac.\
      would soon be over. Go up and see Val and warn him off? But how\
      get his address? Holly wouldn\'92t give it him! A maze of paths, a\
      cloud of possibilities! He lit a cigarette. When he had smoked it\
      halfway through his brow relaxed, almost as if some thin old hand\
      had been passed gently over it; and in his ear something seemed\
      to whisper: \'93Do nothing; be nice to Holly, be nice to her, my\
      dear!\'94 And Jolly heaved a sigh of contentment, blowing smoke\
      through his nostrils....\
\
      But up in her room, divested of her habit, Holly was still\
      frowning. \'93He is _not_\'97he is _not!_\'94 were the words which kept\
      forming on her lips.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER VI JOLYON IN TWO MINDS\
\
\
      A little private hotel over a well-known restaurant near the Gare\
      St. Lazare was Jolyon\'92s haunt in Paris. He hated his fellow\
      Forsytes abroad\'97vapid as fish out of water in their well-trodden\
      runs, the Opera, Rue de Rivoli, and Moulin Rouge. Their air of\
      having come because they wanted to be somewhere else as soon as\
      possible annoyed him. But no other Forsyte came near this haunt,\
      where he had a wood fire in his bedroom and the coffee was\
      excellent. Paris was always to him more attractive in winter. The\
      acrid savour from woodsmoke and chestnut-roasting braziers, the\
      sharpness of the wintry sunshine on bright rays, the open caf\'e9s\
      defying keen-aired winter, the self-contained brisk boulevard\
      crowds, all informed him that in winter Paris possessed a soul\
      which, like a migrant bird, in high summer flew away.\
\
      He spoke French well, had some friends, knew little places where\
      pleasant dishes could be met with, queer types observed. He felt\
      philosophic in Paris, the edge of irony sharpened; life took on a\
      subtle, purposeless meaning, became a bunch of flavours tasted, a\
      darkness shot with shifting gleams of light.\
\
      When in the first week of December he decided to go to Paris, he\
      was far from admitting that Irene\'92s presence was influencing him.\
      He had not been there two days before he owned that the wish to\
      see her had been more than half the reason. In England one did\
      not admit what was natural. He had thought it might be well to\
      speak to her about the letting of her flat and other matters, but\
      in Paris he at once knew better. There was a glamour over the\
      city. On the third day he wrote to her, and received an answer\
      which procured him a pleasurable shiver of the nerves:\
\
      \'93MY DEAR JOLYON,\
          \'93It will be a happiness for me to see you.\
\
      \'93IRENE.\'94\
\
      He took his way to her hotel on a bright day with a feeling such\
      as he had often had going to visit an adored picture. No woman,\
      so far as he remembered, had ever inspired in him this special\
      sensuous and yet impersonal sensation. He was going to sit and\
      feast his eyes, and come away knowing her no better, but ready to\
      go and feast his eyes again to-morrow. Such was his feeling, when\
      in the tarnished and ornate little lounge of a quiet hotel near\
      the river she came to him preceded by a small page-boy who\
      uttered the word, \'93_Madame_,\'94 and vanished. Her face, her smile,\
      the poise of her figure, were just as he had pictured, and the\
      expression of her face said plainly: \'93A friend!\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said, \'93what news, poor exile?\'94\
\
      \'93None.\'94\
\
      \'93Nothing from Soames?\'94\
\
      \'93Nothing.\'94\
\
      \'93I have let the flat for you, and like a good steward I bring you\
      some money. How do you like Paris?\'94\
\
      While he put her through this catechism, it seemed to him that he\
      had never seen lips so fine and sensitive, the lower lip curving\
      just a little upwards, the upper touched at one corner by the\
      least conceivable dimple. It was like discovering a woman in what\
      had hitherto been a sort of soft and breathed-on statue, almost\
      impersonally admired. She owned that to be alone in Paris was a\
      little difficult; and yet, Paris was so full of its own life that\
      it was often, she confessed, as innocuous as a desert. Besides,\
      the English were not liked just now!\
\
      \'93That will hardly be your case,\'94 said Jolyon; \'93you should appeal\
      to the French.\'94\
\
      \'93It has its disadvantages.\'94\
\
      Jolyon nodded.\
\
      \'93Well, you must let _me_ take you about while I\'92m here. We\'92ll\
      start to-morrow. Come and dine at my pet restaurant; and we\'92ll go\
      to the Op\'e9ra-Comique.\'94\
\
      It was the beginning of daily meetings.\
\
      Jolyon soon found that for those who desired a static condition\
      of the affections, Paris was at once the first and last place in\
      which to be friendly with a pretty woman. Revelation was\
      alighting like a bird in his heart, singing: \'93_Elle est ton r\'eave!\
      Elle est ton r\'eave!_\'94 Sometimes this seemed natural, sometimes\
      ludicrous\'97a bad case of elderly rapture. Having once been\
      ostracised by Society, he had never since had any real regard for\
      conventional morality; but the idea of a love which she could\
      never return\'97and how could she at his age?\'97hardly mounted beyond\
      his subconscious mind. He was full, too, of resentment, at the\
      waste and loneliness of her life. Aware of being some comfort to\
      her, and of the pleasure she clearly took in their many little\
      outings, he was amiably desirous of doing and saying nothing to\
      destroy that pleasure. It was like watching a starved plant draw\
      up water, to see her drink in his companionship. So far as they\
      could tell, no one knew her address except himself; she was\
      unknown in Paris, and he but little known, so that discretion\
      seemed unnecessary in those walks, talks, visits to concerts,\
      picture-galleries, theatres, little dinners, expeditions to\
      Versailles, St. Cloud, even Fontainebleau. And time fled\'97one of\
      those full months without past to it or future. What in his youth\
      would certainly have been headlong passion, was now perhaps as\
      deep a feeling, but far gentler, tempered to protective\
      companionship by admiration, hopelessness, and a sense of\
      chivalry\'97arrested in his veins at least so long as she was there,\
      smiling and happy in their friendship, and always to him more\
      beautiful and spiritually responsive: for her philosophy of life\
      seemed to march in admirable step with his own, conditioned by\
      emotion more than by reason, ironically mistrustful, susceptible\
      to beauty, almost passionately humane and tolerant, yet subject\
      to instinctive rigidities of which as a mere man he was less\
      capable. And during all this companionable month he never quite\
      lost that feeling with which he had set out on the first day as\
      if to visit an adored work of art, a well-nigh impersonal desire.\
      The future\'97inexorable pendant to the present he took care not to\
      face, for fear of breaking up his untroubled manner; but he made\
      plans to renew this time in places still more delightful, where\
      the sun was hot and there were strange things to see and paint.\
      The end came swiftly on the 20th of January with a telegram:\
\
      \'93Have enlisted in Imperial Yeomanry.\'97JOLLY.\'94\
\
      Jolyon received it just as he was setting out to meet her at the\
      Louvre. It brought him up with a round turn. While he was\
      lotus-eating here, his boy, whose philosopher and guide he ought\
      to be, had taken this great step towards danger, hardship,\
      perhaps even death. He felt disturbed to the soul, realising\
      suddenly how Irene had twined herself round the roots of his\
      being. Thus threatened with severance, the tie between them\'97for\
      it had become a kind of tie\'97no longer had impersonal quality. The\
      tranquil enjoyment of things in common, Jolyon perceived, was\
      gone for ever. He saw his feeling as it was, in the nature of an\
      infatuation. Ridiculous, perhaps, but so real that sooner or\
      later it must disclose itself. And now, as it seemed to him, he\
      could not, must not, make any such disclosure. The news of Jolly\
      stood inexorably in the way. He was proud of this enlistment;\
      proud of his boy for going off to fight for the country; for on\
      Jolyon\'92s pro-Boerism, too, Black Week had left its mark. And so\
      the end was reached before the beginning! Well, luckily he had\
      never made a sign!\
\
      When he came into the Gallery she was standing before the \'93Virgin\
      of the Rocks,\'94 graceful, absorbed, smiling and unconscious. \'93Have\
      I to give up seeing _that?_\'94 he thought. \'93It\'92s unnatural, so long\
      as she\'92s willing that I should see her.\'94 He stood, unnoticed,\
      watching her, storing up the image of her figure, envying the\
      picture on which she was bending that long scrutiny. Twice she\
      turned her head towards the entrance, and he thought: \'93That\'92s for\
      me!\'94 At last he went forward.\
\
      \'93Look!\'94 he said.\
\
      She read the telegram, and he heard her sigh.\
\
      That sigh, too, was for him! His position was really cruel! To be\
      loyal to his son he must just shake her hand and go. To be loyal\
      to the feeling in his heart he must at least tell her what that\
      feeling was. Could she, would she understand the silence in which\
      he was gazing at that picture?\
\
      \'93I\'92m afraid I must go home at once,\'94 he said at last. \'93I shall\
      miss all this awfully.\'94\
\
      \'93So shall I; but, of course, you must go.\'94\
\
      \'93Well!\'94 said Jolyon holding out his hand.\
\
      Meeting her eyes, a flood of feeling nearly mastered him.\
\
      \'93Such is life!\'94 he said. \'93Take care of yourself, my dear!\'94\
\
      He had a stumbling sensation in his legs and feet, as if his\
      brain refused to steer him away from her. From the doorway, he\
      saw her lift her hand and touch its fingers with her lips. He\
      raised his hat solemnly, and did not look back again.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER VII DARTIE VERSUS DARTIE\
\
\
      The suit\'97Dartie _versus_ Dartie\'97for restitution of those conjugal\
      rights concerning which Winifred was at heart so deeply\
      undecided, followed the laws of subtraction towards day of\
      judgment. This was not reached before the Courts rose for\
      Christmas, but the case was third on the list when they sat\
      again. Winifred spent the Christmas holidays a thought more\
      fashionably than usual, with the matter locked up in her low-cut\
      bosom. James was particularly liberal to her that Christmas,\
      expressing thereby his sympathy, and relief, at the approaching\
      dissolution of her marriage with that \'93precious rascal,\'94 which\
      his old heart felt but his old lips could not utter.\
\
      The disappearance of Dartie made the fall in Consols a\
      comparatively small matter; and as to the scandal\'97the real animus\
      he felt against that fellow, and the increasing lead which\
      property was attaining over reputation in a true Forsyte about to\
      leave this world, served to drug a mind from which all allusions\
      to the matter (except his own) were studiously kept. What worried\
      him as a lawyer and a parent was the fear that Dartie might\
      suddenly turn up and obey the Order of the Court when made. That\
      would be a pretty how-de-do! The fear preyed on him in fact so\
      much that, in presenting Winifred with a large Christmas cheque,\
      he said: \'93It\'92s chiefly for that chap out there; to keep him from\
      coming back.\'94 It was, of course, to pitch away good money, but\
      all in the nature of insurance against that bankruptcy which\
      would no longer hang over him if only the divorce went through;\
      and he questioned Winifred rigorously until she could assure him\
      that the money had been sent. Poor woman!\'97it cost her many a pang\
      to send what must find its way into the vanity-bag of \'93that\
      creature!\'94 Soames, hearing of it, shook his head. They were not\
      dealing with a Forsyte, reasonably tenacious of his purpose. It\
      was very risky without knowing how the land lay out there. Still,\
      it would look well with the Court; and he would see that Dreamer\
      brought it out. \'93I wonder,\'94 he said suddenly, \'93where that ballet\
      goes after the Argentine\'94; never omitting a chance of reminder;\
      for he knew that Winifred still had a weakness, if not for\
      Dartie, at least for not laundering him in public. Though not\
      good at showing admiration, he admitted that she was behaving\
      extremely well, with all her children at home gaping like young\
      birds for news of their father\'97Imogen just on the point of coming\
      out, and Val very restive about the whole thing. He felt that Val\
      was the real heart of the matter to Winifred, who certainly loved\
      him beyond her other children. The boy could spoke the wheel of\
      this divorce yet if he set his mind to it. And Soames was very\
      careful to keep the proximity of the preliminary proceedings from\
      his nephew\'92s ears. He did more. He asked him to dine at the\
      Remove, and over Val\'92s cigar introduced the subject which he knew\
      to be nearest to his heart.\
\
      \'93I hear,\'94 he said, \'93that you want to play polo up at Oxford.\'94\
\
      Val became less recumbent in his chair.\
\
      \'93Rather!\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 continued Soames, \'93that\'92s a very expensive business. Your\
      grandfather isn\'92t likely to consent to it unless he can make sure\
      that he\'92s not got any other drain on him.\'94 And he paused to see\
      whether the boy understood his meaning.\
\
      Val\'92s thick dark lashes concealed his eyes, but a slight grimace\
      appeared on his wide mouth, and he muttered:\
\
      \'93I suppose you mean my Dad!\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Soames; \'93I\'92m afraid it depends on whether he\
      continues to be a drag or not;\'94 and said no more, letting the boy\
      dream it over.\
\
      But Val was also dreaming in those days of a silver-roan palfrey\
      and a girl riding it. Though Crum was in town and an introduction\
      to Cynthia Dark to be had for the asking, Val did not ask;\
      indeed, he shunned Crum and lived a life strange even to himself,\
      except in so far as accounts with tailor and livery stable were\
      concerned. To his mother, his sisters, his young brother, he\
      seemed to spend this Vacation in \'93seeing fellows,\'94 and his\
      evenings sleepily at home. They could not propose anything in\
      daylight that did not meet with the one response: \'93Sorry; I\'92ve\
      got to see a fellow\'94; and he was put to extraordinary shifts to\
      get in and out of the house unobserved in riding clothes; until,\
      being made a member of the Goat\'92s Club, he was able to transport\
      them there, where he could change unregarded and slip off on his\
      hack to Richmond Park. He kept his growing sentiment religiously\
      to himself. Not for a world would he breathe to the \'93fellows,\'94\
      whom he was not \'93seeing,\'94 anything so ridiculous from the point\
      of view of their creed and his. But he could not help its\
      destroying his other appetites. It was coming between him and the\
      legitimate pleasures of youth at last on its own in a way which\
      must, he knew, make him a milksop in the eyes of Crum. All he\
      cared for was to dress in his last-created riding togs, and steal\
      away to the Robin Hill Gate, where presently the silver roan\
      would come demurely sidling with its slim and dark-haired rider,\
      and in the glades bare of leaves they would go off side by side,\
      not talking very much, riding races sometimes, and sometimes\
      holding hands. More than once of an evening, in a moment of\
      expansion, he had been tempted to tell his mother how this shy\
      sweet cousin had stolen in upon him and wrecked his \'93life.\'94 But\
      bitter experience, that all persons above thirty-five were\
      spoil-sports, prevented him. After all, he supposed he would have\
      to go through with College, and she would have to \'93come out,\'94\
      before they could be married; so why complicate things, so long\
      as he could see her? Sisters were teasing and unsympathetic\
      beings, a brother worse, so there was no one to confide in. Ah!\
      And this beastly divorce business! What a misfortune to have a\
      name which other people hadn\'92t! If only he had been called Gordon\
      or Scott or Howard or something fairly common! But Dartie\'97there\
      wasn\'92t another in the directory! One might as well have been\
      named Morkin for all the covert it afforded! So matters went on,\
      till one day in the middle of January the silver-roan palfrey and\
      its rider were missing at the tryst. Lingering in the cold, he\
      debated whether he should ride on to the house: But Jolly might\
      be there, and the memory of their dark encounter was still fresh\
      within him. One could not be always fighting with her brother! So\
      he returned dismally to town and spent an evening plunged in\
      gloom. At breakfast next day he noticed that his mother had on an\
      unfamiliar dress and was wearing her hat. The dress was black\
      with a glimpse of peacock blue, the hat black and large\'97she\
      looked exceptionally well. But when after breakfast she said to\
      him, \'93Come in here, Val,\'94 and led the way to the drawing-room, he\
      was at once beset by qualms. Winifred carefully shut the door and\
      passed her handkerchief over her lips; inhaling the violette de\
      Parme with which it had been soaked, Val thought: \'93Has she found\
      out about Holly?\'94\
\
      Her voice interrupted\
\
      \'93Are you going to be nice to me, dear boy?\'94\
\
      Val grinned doubtfully.\
\
      \'93Will you come with me this morning....\'94\
\
      \'93I\'92ve got to see....\'94 began Val, but something in her face\
      stopped him. \'93I say,\'94 he said, \'93you don\'92t mean....\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, I have to go to the Court this morning.\'94 Already!\'97that d\'97-d\
      business which he had almost succeeded in forgetting, since\
      nobody ever mentioned it. In self-commiseration he stood picking\
      little bits of skin off his fingers. Then noticing that his\
      mother\'92s lips were all awry, he said impulsively: \'93All right,\
      mother; I\'92ll come. The brutes!\'94 What brutes he did not know, but\
      the expression exactly summed up their joint feeling, and\
      restored a measure of equanimity.\
\
      \'93I suppose I\'92d better change into a \'91shooter,\'92\'94 he muttered,\
      escaping to his room. He put on the \'93shooter,\'94 a higher collar, a\
      pearl pin, and his neatest grey spats, to a somewhat blasphemous\
      accompaniment. Looking at himself in the glass, he said, \'93Well,\
      I\'92m damned if I\'92m going to show anything!\'94 and went down. He\
      found his grandfather\'92s carriage at the door, and his mother in\
      furs, with the appearance of one going to a Mansion House\
      Assembly. They seated themselves side by side in the closed\
      barouche, and all the way to the Courts of Justice Val made but\
      one allusion to the business in hand. \'93There\'92ll be nothing about\
      those pearls, will there?\'94\
\
      The little tufted white tails of Winifred\'92s muff began to shiver.\
\
      \'93Oh, no,\'94 she said, \'93it\'92ll be quite harmless to-day. Your\
      grandmother wanted to come too, but I wouldn\'92t let her. I thought\
      you could take care of me. You look so nice, Val. Just pull your\
      coat collar up a little more at the back\'97that\'92s right.\'94\
\
      \'93If they bully you....\'94 began Val.\
\
      \'93Oh! they won\'92t. I shall be very cool. It\'92s the only way.\'94\
\
      \'93They won\'92t want me to give evidence or anything?\'94\
\
      \'93No, dear; it\'92s all arranged.\'94 And she patted his hand. The\
      determined front she was putting on it stayed the turmoil in\
      Val\'92s chest, and he busied himself in drawing his gloves off and\
      on. He had taken what he now saw was the wrong pair to go with\
      his spats; they should have been grey, but were deerskin of a\
      dark tan; whether to keep them on or not he could not decide.\
      They arrived soon after ten. It was his first visit to the Law\
      Courts, and the building struck him at once.\
\
      \'93By Jove!\'94 he said as they passed into the hall, \'93this\'92d make\
      four or five jolly good racket courts.\'94\
\
      Soames was awaiting them at the foot of some stairs.\
\
      \'93Here you are!\'94 he said, without shaking hands, as if the event\
      had made them too familiar for such formalities. \'93It\'92s Happerly\
      Browne, Court I. We shall be on first.\'94\
\
      A sensation such as he had known when going in to bat was playing\
      now in the top of Val\'92s chest, but he followed his mother and\
      uncle doggedly, looking at no more than he could help, and\
      thinking that the place smelled \'93fuggy.\'94 People seemed to be\
      lurking everywhere, and he plucked Soames by the sleeve.\
\
      \'93I say, Uncle, you\'92re not going to let those beastly papers in,\
      are you?\'94\
\
      Soames gave him the sideway look which had reduced many to\
      silence in its time.\
\
      \'93In here,\'94 he said. \'93You needn\'92t take off your furs, Winifred.\'94\
\
      Val entered behind them, nettled and with his head up. In this\
      confounded hole everybody\'97and there were a good many of\
      them\'97seemed sitting on everybody else\'92s knee, though really\
      divided from each other by pews; and Val had a feeling that they\
      might all slip down together into the well. This, however, was\
      but a momentary vision\'97of mahogany, and black gowns, and white\
      blobs of wigs and faces and papers, all rather secret and\
      whispery\'97before he was sitting next his mother in the front row,\
      with his back to it all, glad of her violette de Parme, and\
      taking off his gloves for the last time. His mother was looking\
      at him; he was suddenly conscious that she had really wanted him\
      there next to her, and that he counted for something in this\
      business.\
\
      All right! He would show them! Squaring his shoulders, he crossed\
      his legs and gazed inscrutably at his spats. But just then an\
      \'93old Johnny\'94 in a gown and long wig, looking awfully like a funny\
      raddled woman, came through a door into the high pew opposite,\
      and he had to uncross his legs hastily, and stand up with\
      everybody else.\
\
      \'93Dartie _versus_ Dartie!\'94\
\
      It seemed to Val unspeakably disgusting to have one\'92s name called\
      out like this in public! And, suddenly conscious that someone\
      nearly behind him had begun talking about his family, he screwed\
      his face round to see an old be-wigged buffer, who spoke as if he\
      were eating his own words\'97queer-looking old cuss, the sort of man\
      he had seen once or twice dining at Park Lane and punishing the\
      port; he knew now where they \'93dug them up.\'94 All the same he found\
      the old buffer quite fascinating, and would have continued to\
      stare if his mother had not touched his arm. Reduced to gazing\
      before him, he fixed his eyes on the Judge\'92s face instead. Why\
      should that old \'93sportsman\'94 with his sarcastic mouth and his\
      quick-moving eyes have the power to meddle with their private\
      affairs\'97hadn\'92t he affairs of his own, just as many, and probably\
      just as nasty? And there moved in Val, like an illness, all the\
      deep-seated individualism of his breed. The voice behind him\
      droned along: \'93Differences about money matters\'97extravagance of\
      the respondent\'94 (What a word! Was that his father?)\'97\'93strained\
      situation\'97frequent absences on the part of Mr. Dartie. My client,\
      very rightly, your Ludship will agree, was anxious to check a\
      course\'97but lead to ruin\'97remonstrated\'97gambling at cards and on the\
      racecourse\'97\'94 (\'93That\'92s right!\'94 thought Val, \'93pile it on!\'94) \'93Crisis\
      early in October, when the respondent wrote her this letter from\
      his Club.\'94 Val sat up and his ears burned. \'93I propose to read it\
      with the emendations necessary to the epistle of a gentleman who\
      has been\'97shall we say dining, me Lud?\'94\
\
      \'93Old brute!\'94 thought Val, flushing deeper; \'93you\'92re not paid to\
      make jokes!\'94\
\
      \'93\'91You will not get the chance to insult me again in my own house.\
      I am leaving the country to-morrow. It\'92s played out\'92\'97an\
      expression, your Ludship, not unknown in the mouths of those who\
      have not met with conspicuous success.\'94\
\
      \'93Sniggering owls!\'94 thought Val, and his flush deepened.\
\
      \'93\'91I am tired of being insulted by you.\'92 My client will tell your\
      Ludship that these so-called insults consisted in her calling him\
      \'91the limit\'92,\'97a very mild expression, I venture to suggest, in all\
      the circumstances.\'94\
\
      Val glanced sideways at his mother\'92s impassive face, it had a\
      hunted look in the eyes. \'93Poor mother,\'94 he thought, and touched\
      her arm with his own. The voice behind droned on.\
\
      \'93\'91I am going to live a new life. M. D.\'92\'94\
\
      \'93And next day, me Lud, the respondent left by the steamship\
      _Tuscarora_ for Buenos Aires. Since then we have nothing from him\
      but a cabled refusal in answer to the letter which my client\
      wrote the following day in great distress, begging him to return\
      to her. With your Ludship\'92s permission. I shall now put Mrs.\
      Dartie in the box.\'94\
\
      When his mother rose, Val had a tremendous impulse to rise too\
      and say: \'93Look here! I\'92m going to see you jolly well treat her\
      decently.\'94 He subdued it, however; heard her saying, \'93the truth,\
      the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,\'94 and looked up. She\
      made a rich figure of it, in her furs and large hat, with a\
      slight flush on her cheek-bones, calm, matter-of-fact; and he\
      felt proud of her thus confronting all these \'93confounded\
      lawyers.\'94 The examination began. Knowing that this was only the\
      preliminary to divorce, Val followed with a certain glee the\
      questions framed so as to give the impression that she really\
      wanted his father back. It seemed to him that they were \'93foxing\
      Old Bagwigs finely.\'94\
\
      And he received a most unpleasant jar when the Judge said\
      suddenly:\
\
      \'93Now, why did your husband leave you\'97not because you called him\
      \'91the limit,\'92 you know?\'94\
\
      Val saw his uncle lift his eyes to the witness box, without\
      moving his face; heard a shuffle of papers behind him; and\
      instinct told him that the issue was in peril. Had Uncle Soames\
      and the old buffer behind made a mess of it? His mother was\
      speaking with a slight drawl.\
\
      \'93No, my Lord, but it had gone on a long time.\'94\
\
      \'93What had gone on?\'94\
\
      \'93Our differences about money.\'94\
\
      \'93But you supplied the money. Do you suggest that he left you to\
      better his position?\'94\
\
      \'93The brute! The old brute, and nothing but the brute!\'94 thought\
      Val suddenly. \'93He smells a rat he\'92s trying to get at the pastry!\'94\
      And his heart stood still. If\'97if he did, then, of course, he\
      would know that his mother didn\'92t really want his father back.\
      His mother spoke again, a thought more fashionably.\
\
      \'93No, my Lord, but you see I had refused to give him any more\
      money. It took him a long time to believe that, but he did at\
      last\'97and when he did....\'94\
\
      \'93I see, you had refused. But you\'92ve sent him some since.\'94\
\
      \'93My Lord, I wanted him back.\'94\
\
      \'93And you thought that would bring him?\'94\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know, my Lord, I acted on my father\'92s advice.\'94\
\
      Something in the Judge\'92s face, in the sound of the papers behind\
      him, in the sudden crossing of his uncle\'92s legs, told Val that\
      she had made just the right answer. \'93Crafty!\'94 he thought; \'93by\
      Jove, what humbug it all is!\'94\
\
      The Judge was speaking:\
\
      \'93Just one more question, Mrs. Dartie. Are you still fond of your\
      husband?\'94\
\
      Val\'92s hands, slack behind him, became fists. What business had\
      that Judge to make things human suddenly? To make his mother\
      speak out of her heart, and say what, perhaps, she didn\'92t know\
      herself, before all these people! It wasn\'92t decent. His mother\
      answered, rather low: \'93Yes, my Lord.\'94 Val saw the Judge nod.\
      \'93Wish I could take a cock-shy at your head!\'94 he thought\
      irreverently, as his mother came back to her seat beside him.\
      Witnesses to his father\'92s departure and continued absence\
      followed\'97one of their own maids even, which struck Val as\
      particularly beastly; there was more talking, all humbug; and\
      then the Judge pronounced the decree for restitution, and they\
      got up to go. Val walked out behind his mother, chin squared,\
      eyelids drooped, doing his level best to despise everybody. His\
      mother\'92s voice in the corridor roused him from an angry trance.\
\
      \'93You behaved beautifully, dear. It was such a comfort to have\
      you. Your uncle and I are going to lunch.\'94\
\
      \'93All right,\'94 said Val; \'93I shall have time to go and see that\
      fellow.\'94 And, parting from them abruptly, he ran down the stairs\
      and out into the air. He bolted into a hansom, and drove to the\
      Goat\'92s Club. His thoughts were on Holly and what he must do\
      before her brother showed her this thing in to-morrow\'92s paper.\
\
      When Val had left them Soames and Winifred made their way to the\
      Cheshire Cheese. He had suggested it as a meeting place with Mr.\
      Bellby. At that early hour of noon they would have it to\
      themselves, and Winifred had thought it would be \'93amusing\'94 to see\
      this far-famed hostelry. Having ordered a light repast, to the\
      consternation of the waiter, they awaited its arrival together\
      with that of Mr. Bellby, in silent reaction after the hour and a\
      half\'92s suspense on the tenterhooks of publicity. Mr. Bellby\
      entered presently, preceded by his nose, as cheerful as they were\
      glum. Well! they had got the decree of restitution, and what was\
      the matter with that!\
\
      \'93Quite,\'94 said Soames in a suitably low voice, \'93but we shall have\
      to begin again to get evidence. He\'92ll probably try the divorce\'97it\
      will look fishy if it comes out that we knew of misconduct from\
      the start. His questions showed well enough that he doesn\'92t like\
      this restitution dodge.\'94\
\
      \'93Pho!\'94 said Mr. Bellby cheerily, \'93he\'92ll forget! Why, man, he\'92ll\
      have tried a hundred cases between now and then. Besides, he\'92s\
      bound by precedent to give ye your divorce, if the evidence is\
      satisfactory. We won\'92t let um know that Mrs. Dartie had knowledge\
      of the facts. Dreamer did it very nicely\'97he\'92s got a fatherly\
      touch about um!\'94\
\
      Soames nodded.\
\
      \'93And I compliment ye, Mrs. Dartie,\'94 went on Mr. Bellby; \'93ye\'92ve a\
      natural gift for giving evidence. Steady as a rock.\'94\
\
      Here the waiter arrived with three plates balanced on one arm,\
      and the remark: \'93I \'92urried up the pudden, sir. You\'92ll find plenty\
      o\'92 lark in it to-day.\'94\
\
      Mr. Bellby applauded his forethought with a dip of his nose. But\
      Soames and Winifred looked with dismay at their light lunch of\
      gravified brown masses, touching them gingerly with their forks\
      in the hope of distinguishing the bodies of the tasty little\
      song-givers. Having begun, however, they found they were hungrier\
      than they thought, and finished the lot, with a glass of port\
      apiece. Conversation turned on the war. Soames thought Ladysmith\
      would fall, and it might last a year. Bellby thought it would be\
      over by the summer. Both agreed that they wanted more men. There\
      was nothing for it but complete victory, since it was now a\
      question of prestige. Winifred brought things back to more solid\
      ground by saying that she did not want the divorce suit to come\
      on till after the summer holidays had begun at Oxford, then the\
      boys would have forgotten about it before Val had to go up again;\
      the London season too would be over. The lawyers reassured her,\
      an interval of six months was necessary\'97after that the earlier\
      the better. People were now beginning to come in, and they\
      parted\'97Soames to the city, Bellby to his chambers, Winifred in a\
      hansom to Park Lane to let her mother know how she had fared. The\
      issue had been so satisfactory on the whole that it was\
      considered advisable to tell James, who never failed to say day\
      after day that he didn\'92t know about Winifred\'92s affair, he\
      couldn\'92t tell. As his sands ran out; the importance of mundane\
      matters became increasingly grave to him, as if he were feeling:\
      \'93I must make the most of it, and worry well; I shall soon have\
      nothing to worry about.\'94\
\
      He received the report grudgingly. It was a new-fangled way of\
      going about things, and he didn\'92t know! But he gave Winifred a\
      cheque, saying:\
\
      \'93I expect you\'92ll have a lot of expense. That\'92s a new hat you\'92ve\
      got on. Why doesn\'92t Val come and see us?\'94\
\
      Winifred promised to bring him to dinner soon. And, going home,\
      she sought her bedroom where she could be alone. Now that her\
      husband had been ordered back into her custody with a view to\
      putting him away from her for ever, she would try once more to\
      find out from her sore and lonely heart what she really wanted.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER VIII THE CHALLENGE\
\
\
      The morning had been misty, verging on frost, but the sun came\
      out while Val was jogging towards the Roehampton Gate, whence he\
      would canter on to the usual tryst. His spirits were rising\
      rapidly. There had been nothing so very terrible in the morning\'92s\
      proceedings beyond the general disgrace of violated privacy. \'93If\
      we were engaged!\'94 he thought, \'93what happens wouldn\'92t matter.\'94 He\
      felt, indeed, like human society, which kicks and clamours at the\
      results of matrimony, and hastens to get married. And he galloped\
      over the winter-dried grass of Richmond Park, fearing to be late.\
      But again he was alone at the trysting spot, and this second\
      defection on the part of Holly upset him dreadfully. He could not\
      go back without seeing her to-day! Emerging from the Park, he\
      proceeded towards Robin Hill. He could not make up his mind for\
      whom to ask. Suppose her father were back, or her sister or\
      brother were in! He decided to gamble, and ask for them all\
      first, so that if he were in luck and they were not there, it\
      would be quite natural in the end to ask for Holly; while if any\
      of them _were_ in\'97an \'93excuse for a ride\'94 must be his saving\
      grace.\
\
      \'93Only Miss Holly is in, sir.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! thanks. Might I take my horse round to the stables? And\
      would you say\'97her cousin, Mr. Val Dartie.\'94\
\
      When he returned she was in the hall, very flushed and shy. She\
      led him to the far end, and they sat down on a wide window-seat.\
\
      \'93I\'92ve been awfully anxious,\'94 said Val in a low voice. \'93What\'92s the\
      matter?\'94\
\
      \'93Jolly knows about our riding.\'94\
\
      \'93Is he in?\'94\
\
      \'93No; but I expect he will be soon.\'94\
\
      \'93Then!\'94 cried Val, and diving forward, he seized her hand. She\
      tried to withdraw it, failed, gave up the attempt, and looked at\
      him wistfully.\
\
      \'93First of all,\'94 he said, \'93I want to tell you something about my\
      family. My Dad, you know, isn\'92t altogether\'97I mean, he\'92s left my\
      mother and they\'92re trying to divorce him; so they\'92ve ordered him\
      to come back, you see. You\'92ll see that in the paper to-morrow.\'94\
\
      Her eyes deepened in colour and fearful interest; her hand\
      squeezed his. But the gambler in Val was roused now, and he\
      hurried on:\
\
      \'93Of course there\'92s nothing very much at present, but there will\
      be, I expect, before it\'92s over; divorce suits are beastly, you\
      know. I wanted to tell you, because\'97because\'97you ought to\
      know\'97if\'97\'94 and he began to stammer, gazing at her troubled eyes,\
      \'93if\'97if you\'92re going to be a darling and love me, Holly. I love\
      you\'97ever so; and I want to be engaged.\'94 He had done it in a\
      manner so inadequate that he could have punched his own head; and\
      dropping on his knees, he tried to get nearer to that soft,\
      troubled face. \'93You do love me\'97don\'92t you? If you don\'92t I....\'94\
      There was a moment of silence and suspense, so awful that he\
      could hear the sound of a mowing-machine far out on the lawn\
      pretending there was grass to cut. Then she swayed forward; her\
      free hand touched his hair, and he gasped: \'93Oh, Holly!\'94\
\
      Her answer was very soft: \'93Oh, Val!\'94\
\
      He had dreamed of this moment, but always in an imperative mood,\
      as the masterful young lover, and now he felt humble, touched,\
      trembly. He was afraid to stir off his knees lest he should break\
      the spell; lest, if he did, she should shrink and deny her own\
      surrender\'97so tremulous was she in his grasp, with her eyelids\
      closed and his lips nearing them. Her eyes opened, seemed to swim\
      a little; he pressed his lips to hers. Suddenly he sprang up;\
      there had been footsteps, a sort of startled grunt. He looked\
      round. No one! But the long curtains which barred off the outer\
      hall were quivering.\
\
      \'93My God! Who was that?\'94\
\
      Holly too was on her feet.\
\
      \'93Jolly, I expect,\'94 she whispered.\
\
      Val clenched fists and resolution.\
\
      \'93All right!\'94 he said, \'93I don\'92t care a bit now we\'92re engaged,\'94 and\
      striding towards the curtains, he drew them aside. There at the\
      fireplace in the hall stood Jolly, with his back elaborately\
      turned. Val went forward. Jolly faced round on him.\
\
      \'93I beg your pardon for hearing,\'94 he said.\
\
      With the best intentions in the world, Val could not help\
      admiring him at that moment; his face was clear, his voice quiet,\
      he looked somehow distinguished, as if acting up to principle.\
\
      \'93Well!\'94 Val said abruptly, \'93it\'92s nothing to you.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 said Jolly; \'93you come this way,\'94 and he crossed the hall.\
      Val followed. At the study door he felt a touch on his arm;\
      Holly\'92s voice said:\
\
      \'93I\'92m coming too.\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Jolly.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Holly.\
\
      Jolly opened the door, and they all three went in. Once in the\
      little room, they stood in a sort of triangle on three corners of\
      the worn Turkey carpet; awkwardly upright, not looking at each\
      other, quite incapable of seeing any humour in the situation.\
\
      Val broke the silence.\
\
      \'93Holly and I are engaged.\'94\
\
      Jolly stepped back and leaned against the lintel of the window.\
\
      \'93This is our house,\'94 he said; \'93I\'92m not going to insult you in it.\
      But my father\'92s away. I\'92m in charge of my sister. You\'92ve taken\
      advantage of me.\
\
      \'93I didn\'92t mean to,\'94 said Val hotly.\
\
      \'93I think you did,\'94 said Jolly. \'93If you hadn\'92t meant to, you\'92d\
      have spoken to me, or waited for my father to come back.\'94\
\
      \'93There were reasons,\'94 said Val.\
\
      \'93What reasons?\'94\
\
      \'93About my family\'97I\'92ve just told her. I wanted her to know before\
      things happen.\'94\
\
      Jolly suddenly became less distinguished.\
\
      \'93You\'92re kids,\'94 he said, \'93and you know you are.\
\
      \'93I am _not_ a kid,\'94 said Val.\
\
      \'93You are\'97you\'92re not twenty.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, what are you?\'94\
\
      \'93I _am_ twenty,\'94 said Jolly.\
\
      \'93Only just; anyway, I\'92m as good a man as you.\'94\
\
      Jolly\'92s face crimsoned, then clouded. Some struggle was evidently\
      taking place in him; and Val and Holly stared at him, so clearly\
      was that struggle marked; they could even hear him breathing.\
      Then his face cleared up and became oddly resolute.\
\
      \'93We\'92ll see that,\'94 he said. \'93I dare you to do what I\'92m going to\
      do.\'94\
\
      \'93Dare me?\'94\
\
      Jolly smiled. \'93Yes,\'94 he said, \'93dare you; and I know very well you\
      won\'92t.\'94\
\
      A stab of misgiving shot through Val; this was riding very blind.\
\
      \'93I haven\'92t forgotten that you\'92re a fire-eater,\'94 said Jolly\
      slowly, \'93and I think that\'92s about all you are; or that you called\
      me a pro-Boer.\'94\
\
      Val heard a gasp above the sound of his own hard breathing, and\
      saw Holly\'92s face poked a little forward, very pale, with big\
      eyes.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 went on Jolly with a sort of smile, \'93we shall soon see.\
      I\'92m going to join the Imperial Yeomanry, and I dare you to do the\
      same, Mr. Val Dartie.\'94\
\
      Val\'92s head jerked on its stem. It was like a blow between the\
      eyes, so utterly unthought of, so extreme and ugly in the midst\
      of his dreaming; and he looked at Holly with eyes grown suddenly,\
      touchingly haggard.\
\
      \'93Sit down!\'94 said Jolly. \'93Take your time! Think it over well.\'94 And\
      he himself sat down on the arm of his grandfather\'92s chair.\
\
      Val did not sit down; he stood with hands thrust deep into his\
      breeches\'92 pockets\'97hands clenched and quivering. The full\
      awfulness of this decision one way or the other knocked at his\
      mind with double knocks as of an angry postman. If he did not\
      take that \'93dare\'94 he was disgraced in Holly\'92s eyes, and in the\
      eyes of that young enemy, her brute of a brother. Yet if he took\
      it, ah! then all would vanish\'97her face, her eyes, her hair, her\
      kisses just begun!\
\
      \'93Take your time,\'94 said Jolly again; \'93I don\'92t want to be unfair.\'94\
\
      And they both looked at Holly. She had recoiled against the\
      bookshelves reaching to the ceiling; her dark head leaned against\
      Gibbon\'92s _Roman Empire_, her eyes in a sort of soft grey agony\
      were fixed on Val. And he, who had not much gift of insight, had\
      suddenly a gleam of vision. She would be proud of her\
      brother\'97that enemy! She would be ashamed of him! His hands came\
      out of his pockets as if lifted by a spring.\
\
      \'93All right!\'94 he said. \'93Done!\'94\
\
      Holly\'92s face\'97oh! it was queer! He saw her flush, start forward.\
      He had done the right thing\'97her face was shining with wistful\
      admiration. Jolly stood up and made a little bow as who should\
      say: \'93You\'92ve passed.\'94\
\
      \'93To-morrow, then,\'94 he said, \'93we\'92ll go together.\'94\
\
      Recovering from the impetus which had carried him to that\
      decision, Val looked at him maliciously from under his lashes.\
      \'93All right,\'94 he thought, \'93one to you. I shall have to join\'97but\
      I\'92ll get back on you somehow.\'94 And he said with dignity: \'93I shall\
      be ready.\'94\
\
      \'93We\'92ll meet at the main Recruiting Office, then,\'94 said Jolly, \'93at\
      twelve o\'92clock.\'94 And, opening the window, he went out on to the\
      terrace, conforming to the creed which had made him retire when\
      he surprised them in the hall.\
\
      The confusion in the mind of Val thus left alone with her for\
      whom he had paid this sudden price was extreme. The mood of\
      \'93showing-off\'94 was still, however, uppermost. One must do the\
      wretched thing with an air.\
\
      \'93We shall get plenty of riding and shooting, anyway,\'94 he said;\
      \'93that\'92s one comfort.\'94 And it gave him a sort of grim pleasure to\
      hear the sigh which seemed to come from the bottom of her heart.\
\
      \'93Oh! the war\'92ll soon be over,\'94 he said; \'93perhaps we shan\'92t even\
      have to go out. I don\'92t care, except for you.\'94 He would be out of\
      the way of that beastly divorce. It was an ill-wind! He felt her\
      warm hand slip into his. Jolly thought he had stopped their\
      loving each other, did he? He held her tightly round the waist,\
      looking at her softly through his lashes, smiling to cheer her\
      up, promising to come down and see her soon, feeling somehow six\
      inches taller and much more in command of her than he had ever\
      dared feel before. Many times he kissed her before he mounted and\
      rode back to town. So, swiftly, on the least provocation, does\
      the possessive instinct flourish and grow.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER IX DINNER AT JAMES\'92\
\
\
      Dinner parties were not now given at James\'92 in Park Lane\'97to every\
      house the moment comes when Master or Mistress is no longer \'93up\
      to it\'94. no more can nine courses be served to twenty mouths above\
      twenty fine white expanses; nor does the household cat any longer\
      wonder why she is suddenly shut up.\
\
      So with something like excitement Emily\'97who at seventy would\
      still have liked a little feast and fashion now and then\'97ordered\
      dinner for six instead of two, herself wrote a number of foreign\
      words on cards, and arranged the flowers\'97mimosa from the Riviera,\
      and white Roman hyacinths not from Rome. There would only be, of\
      course, James and herself, Soames, Winifred, Val, and Imogen\'97but\
      she liked to pretend a little and dally in imagination with the\
      glory of the past. She so dressed herself that James remarked:\
\
      \'93What are you putting on that thing for? You\'92ll catch cold.\'94\
\
      But Emily knew that the necks of women are protected by love of\
      shining, unto fourscore years, and she only answered:\
\
      \'93Let me put you on one of those dickies I got you, James; then\
      you\'92ll only have to change your trousers, and put on your velvet\
      coat, and there you\'92ll be. Val likes you to look nice.\'94\
\
      \'93Dicky!\'94 said James. \'93You\'92re always wasting your money on\
      something.\'94\
\
      But he suffered the change to be made till his neck also shone,\
      murmuring vaguely:\
\
      \'93He\'92s an extravagant chap, I\'92m afraid.\'94\
\
      A little brighter in the eye, with rather more colour than usual\
      in his cheeks, he took his seat in the drawing-room to wait for\
      the sound of the front-door bell.\
\
      \'93I\'92ve made it a proper dinner party,\'94 Emily said comfortably; \'93I\
      thought it would be good practice for Imogen\'97she must get used to\
      it now she\'92s coming out.\'94\
\
      James uttered an indeterminate sound, thinking of Imogen as she\
      used to climb about his knee or pull Christmas crackers with him.\
\
      \'93She\'92ll be pretty,\'94 he muttered, \'93I shouldn\'92t wonder.\'94\
\
      \'93She _is_ pretty,\'94 said Emily; \'93she ought to make a good match.\'94\
\
      \'93There you go,\'94 murmured James; \'93she\'92d much better stay at home\
      and look after her mother.\'94 A second Dartie carrying off his\
      pretty granddaughter would finish him! He had never quite\
      forgiven Emily for having been as much taken in by Montague\
      Dartie as he himself had been.\
\
      \'93Where\'92s Warmson?\'94 he said suddenly. \'93I should like a glass of\
      Madeira to-night.\'94\
\
      \'93There\'92s champagne, James.\'94\
\
      James shook his head. \'93No body,\'94 he said; \'93I can\'92t get any good\
      out of it.\'94\
\
      Emily reached forward on her side of the fire and rang the bell.\
\
      \'93Your master would like a bottle of Madeira opened, Warmson.\'94\
\
      \'93No, no!\'94 said James, the tips of his ears quivering with\
      vehemence, and his eyes fixed on an object seen by him alone.\
      \'93Look here, Warmson, you go to the inner cellar, and on the\
      middle shelf of the end bin on the left you\'92ll see seven bottles;\
      take the one in the centre, and don\'92t shake it. It\'92s the last of\
      the Madeira I had from Mr. Jolyon when we came in here\'97never been\
      moved; it ought to be in prime condition still; but I don\'92t know,\
      I can\'92t tell.\'94\
\
      \'93Very good, sir,\'94 responded the withdrawing Warmson.\
\
      \'93I was keeping it for our golden wedding,\'94 said James suddenly,\
      \'93but I shan\'92t live three years at my age.\'94\
\
      \'93Nonsense, James,\'94 said Emily, \'93don\'92t talk like that.\'94\
\
      \'93I ought to have got it up myself,\'94 murmured James, \'93he\'92ll shake\
      it as likely as not.\'94 And he sank into silent recollection of\
      long moments among the open gas-jets, the cobwebs and the good\
      smell of wine-soaked corks, which had been appetiser to so many\
      feasts. In the wine from that cellar was written the history of\
      the forty odd years since he had come to the Park Lane house with\
      his young bride, and of the many generations of friends and\
      acquaintances who had passed into the unknown; its depleted bins\
      preserved the record of family festivity\'97all the marriages,\
      births, deaths of his kith and kin. And when he was gone there it\
      would be, and he didn\'92t know what would become of it. It\'92d be\
      drunk or spoiled, he shouldn\'92t wonder!\
\
      From that deep reverie the entrance of his son dragged him,\
      followed very soon by that of Winifred and her two eldest.\
\
      They went down arm-in-arm\'97James with Imogen, the debutante,\
      because his pretty grandchild cheered him; Soames with Winifred;\
      Emily with Val, whose eyes lighting on the oysters brightened.\
      This was to be a proper full \'93blowout\'94 with \'93fizz\'94 and port! And\
      he felt in need of it, after what he had done that day, as yet\
      undivulged. After the first glass or two it became pleasant to\
      have this bombshell up his sleeve, this piece of sensational\
      patriotism, or example, rather, of personal daring, to\
      display\'97for his pleasure in what he had done for his Queen and\
      Country was so far entirely personal. He was now a \'93blood,\'94\
      indissolubly connected with guns and horses; he had a right to\
      swagger\'97not, of course, that he was going to. He should just\
      announce it quietly, when there was a pause. And, glancing down\
      the menu, he determined on \'93Bombe aux fraises\'94 as the proper\
      moment; there would be a certain solemnity while they were eating\
      that. Once or twice before they reached that rosy summit of the\
      dinner he was attacked by remembrance that his grandfather was\
      never told anything! Still, the old boy was drinking Madeira, and\
      looking jolly fit! Besides, he ought to be pleased at this\
      set-off to the disgrace of the divorce. The sight of his uncle\
      opposite, too, was a sharp incentive. He was so far from being a\
      sportsman that it would be worth a lot to see his face. Besides,\
      better to tell his mother in this way than privately, which might\
      upset them both! He was sorry for her, but after all one couldn\'92t\
      be expected to feel much for others when one had to part from\
      Holly.\
\
      His grandfather\'92s voice travelled to him thinly. \'93Val, try a\
      little of the Madeira with your ice. You won\'92t get that up at\
      college.\'94\
\
      Val watched the slow liquid filling his glass, the essential oil\
      of the old wine glazing the surface; inhaled its aroma, and\
      thought: \'93Now for it!\'94 It was a rich moment. He sipped, and a\
      gentle glow spread in his veins, already heated. With a rapid\
      look round, he said, \'93I joined the Imperial Yeomanry to-day,\
      Granny,\'94 and emptied his glass as though drinking the health of\
      his own act.\
\
      \'93What!\'94 It was his mother\'92s desolate little word.\
\
      \'93Young Jolly Forsyte and I went down there together.\'94\
\
      \'93You didn\'92t sign?\'94 from Uncle Soames.\
\
      \'93Rather! We go into camp on Monday.\'94\
\
      \'93I _say!_\'94 cried Imogen.\
\
      All looked at James. He was leaning forward with his hand behind\
      his ear.\
\
      \'93What\'92s that?\'94 he said. \'93What\'92s he saying? I can\'92t hear.\'94\
\
      Emily reached forward to pat Val\'92s hand.\
\
      \'93It\'92s only that Val has joined the Yeomanry, James; it\'92s very\
      nice for him. He\'92ll look his best in uniform.\'94\
\
      \'93Joined the\'97rubbish!\'94 came from James, tremulously loud. \'93You\
      can\'92t see two yards before your nose. He\'97he\'92ll have to go out\
      there. Why! he\'92ll be fighting before he knows where he is.\'94\
\
      Val saw Imogen\'92s eyes admiring him, and his mother still and\
      fashionable with her handkerchief before her lips.\
\
      Suddenly his uncle spoke.\
\
      \'93You\'92re under age.\'94\
\
      \'93I thought of that,\'94 smiled Val; \'93I gave my age as twenty-one.\'94\
\
      He heard his grandmother\'92s admiring, \'93Well, Val, that was plucky\
      of you;\'94 was conscious of Warmson deferentially filling his\
      champagne glass; and of his grandfather\'92s voice moaning: \'93_I_\
      don\'92t know what\'92ll become of you if you go on like this.\'94\
\
      Imogen was patting his shoulder, his uncle looking at him\
      sidelong; only his mother sat unmoving, till, affected by her\
      stillness, Val said:\
\
      \'93It\'92s all right, you know; we shall soon have them on the run. I\
      only hope I shall come in for something.\'94\
\
      He felt elated, sorry, tremendously important all at once. This\
      would show Uncle Soames, and all the Forsytes, how to be\
      sportsmen. He had certainly done something heroic and exceptional\
      in giving his age as twenty-one.\
\
      Emily\'92s voice brought him back to earth.\
\
      \'93You mustn\'92t have a second glass, James. Warmson!\'94\
\
      \'93Won\'92t they be astonished at Timothy\'92s!\'94 burst out Imogen. \'93I\'92d\
      give anything to see their faces. Do you have a sword, Val, or\
      only a popgun?\'94\
\
      \'93What made you?\'94\
\
      His uncle\'92s voice produced a slight chill in the pit of Val\'92s\
      stomach. Made him? How answer that? He was grateful for his\
      grandmother\'92s comfortable:\
\
      \'93Well, I think it\'92s very plucky of Val. I\'92m sure he\'92ll make a\
      splendid soldier; he\'92s just the figure for it. We shall all be\
      proud of him.\'94\
\
      \'93What had young Jolly Forsyte to do with it? Why did you go\
      together?\'94 pursued Soames, uncannily relentless. \'93I thought you\
      weren\'92t friendly with him?\'94\
\
      \'93I\'92m not,\'94 mumbled Val, \'93but I wasn\'92t going to be beaten by\
      _him_.\'94 He saw his uncle look at him quite differently, as if\
      approving. His grandfather was nodding too, his grandmother\
      tossing her head. They all approved of his not being beaten by\
      that cousin of his. There must be a reason! Val was dimly\
      conscious of some disturbing point outside his range of vision;\
      as it might be, the unlocated centre of a cyclone. And, staring\
      at his uncle\'92s face, he had a quite unaccountable vision of a\
      woman with dark eyes, gold hair, and a white neck, who smelt\
      nice, and had pretty silken clothes which he had liked feeling\
      when he was quite small. By Jove, yes! Aunt Irene! She used to\
      kiss him, and he had bitten her arm once, playfully, because he\
      liked it\'97so soft. His grandfather was speaking:\
\
      \'93What\'92s his father doing?\'94\
\
      \'93He\'92s away in Paris,\'94 Val said, staring at the very queer\
      expression on his uncle\'92s face, like\'97like that of a snarling dog.\
\
      \'93Artists!\'94 said James. The word coming from the very bottom of\
      his soul, broke up the dinner.\
\
      Opposite his mother in the cab going home, Val tasted the\
      after-fruits of heroism, like medlars over-ripe.\
\
      She only said, indeed, that he must go to his tailor\'92s at once\
      and have his uniform properly made, and not just put up with what\
      they gave him. But he could feel that she was very much upset. It\
      was on his lips to console her with the spoken thought that he\
      would be out of the way of that beastly divorce, but the presence\
      of Imogen, and the knowledge that his mother would _not_ be out\
      of the way, restrained him. He felt aggrieved that she did not\
      seem more proud of him. When Imogen had gone to bed, he risked\
      the emotional.\
\
      \'93I\'92m awfully sorry to have to leave you, Mother.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, I must make the best of it. We must try and get you a\
      commission as soon as we can; then you won\'92t have to rough it so.\
      Do you know any drill, Val?\'94\
\
      \'93Not a scrap.\'94\
\
      \'93I hope they won\'92t worry you much. I must take you about to get\
      the things to-morrow. Good-night; kiss me.\'94\
\
      With that kiss, soft and hot, between his eyes, and those words,\
      \'93I hope they won\'92t worry you much,\'94 in his ears, he sat down to a\
      cigarette, before a dying fire. The heat was out of him\'97the glow\
      of cutting a dash. It was all a damned heart-aching bore. \'93I\'92ll\
      be even with that chap Jolly,\'94 he thought, trailing up the\
      stairs, past the room where his mother was biting her pillow to\
      smother a sense of desolation which was trying to make her sob.\
\
      And soon only one of the diners at James\'92 was awake\'97Soames, in\
      his bedroom above his father\'92s.\
\
      So that fellow Jolyon was in Paris\'97what was he doing there?\
      Hanging round Irene! The last report from Polteed had hinted that\
      there might be something soon. Could it be this? That fellow,\
      with his beard and his cursed amused way of speaking\'97son of the\
      old man who had given him the nickname \'93Man of Property,\'94 and\
      bought the fatal house from him. Soames had ever resented having\
      had to sell the house at Robin Hill; never forgiven his uncle for\
      having bought it, or his cousin for living in it.\
\
      Reckless of the cold, he threw his window up and gazed out across\
      the Park. Bleak and dark the January night; little sound of\
      traffic; a frost coming; bare trees; a star or two. \'93I\'92ll see\
      Polteed to-morrow,\'94 he thought. \'93By God! I\'92m mad, I think, to\
      want her still. That fellow! If...? Um! No!\'94\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER X DEATH OF THE DOG BALTHASAR\
\
\
      Jolyon, who had crossed from Calais by night, arrived at Robin\
      Hill on Sunday morning. He had sent no word beforehand, so walked\
      up from the station, entering his domain by the coppice gate.\
      Coming to the log seat fashioned out of an old fallen trunk, he\
      sat down, first laying his overcoat on it.\
\
      \'93Lumbago!\'94 he thought; \'93that\'92s what love ends in at my time of\
      life!\'94 And suddenly Irene seemed very near, just as she had been\
      that day of rambling at Fontainebleau when they had sat on a log\
      to eat their lunch. Hauntingly near! Odour drawn out of fallen\
      leaves by the pale-filtering sunlight soaked his nostrils. \'93I\'92m\
      glad it isn\'92t spring,\'94 he thought. With the scent of sap, and the\
      song of birds, and the bursting of the blossoms, it would have\
      been unbearable! \'93I hope I shall be over it by then, old fool\
      that I am!\'94 and picking up his coat, he walked on into the field.\
      He passed the pond and mounted the hill slowly.\
\
      Near the top a hoarse barking greeted him. Up on the lawn above\
      the fernery he could see his old dog Balthasar. The animal, whose\
      dim eyes took his master for a stranger, was warning the world\
      against him. Jolyon gave his special whistle. Even at that\
      distance of a hundred yards and more he could see the dawning\
      recognition in the obese brown-white body. The old dog got off\
      his haunches, and his tail, close-curled over his back, began a\
      feeble, excited fluttering; he came waddling forward, gathered\
      momentum, and disappeared over the edge of the fernery. Jolyon\
      expected to meet him at the wicket gate, but Balthasar was not\
      there, and, rather alarmed, he turned into the fernery. On his\
      fat side, looking up with eyes already glazing, the old dog lay.\
\
      \'93What is it, my poor old man?\'94 cried Jolyon. Balthasar\'92s curled\
      and fluffy tail just moved; his filming eyes seemed saying: \'93I\
      can\'92t get up, master, but I\'92m glad to see you.\'94\
\
      Jolyon knelt down; his eyes, very dimmed, could hardly see the\
      slowly ceasing heave of the dog\'92s side. He raised the head a\
      little\'97very heavy.\
\
      \'93What is it, dear man? Where are you hurt?\'94 The tail fluttered\
      once; the eyes lost the look of life. Jolyon passed his hands all\
      over the inert warm bulk. There was nothing\'97the heart had simply\
      failed in that obese body from the emotion of his master\'92s\
      return. Jolyon could feel the muzzle, where a few whitish\
      bristles grew, cooling already against his lips. He stayed for\
      some minutes kneeling; with his hand beneath the stiffening head.\
      The body was very heavy when he bore it to the top of the field;\
      leaves had drifted there, and he strewed it with a covering of\
      them; there was no wind, and they would keep him from curious\
      eyes until the afternoon. \'93I\'92ll bury him myself,\'94 he thought.\
      Eighteen years had gone since he first went into the St. John\'92s\
      Wood house with that tiny puppy in his pocket. Strange that the\
      old dog should die just now! Was it an omen? He turned at the\
      gate to look back at that russet mound, then went slowly towards\
      the house, very choky in the throat.\
\
      June was at home; she had come down hotfoot on hearing the news\
      of Jolly\'92s enlistment. His patriotism had conquered her feeling\
      for the Boers. The atmosphere of his house was strange and\
      pocketty when Jolyon came in and told them of the dog Balthasar\'92s\
      death. The news had a unifying effect. A link with the past had\
      snapped\'97the dog Balthasar! Two of them could remember nothing\
      before his day; to June he represented the last years of her\
      grandfather; to Jolyon that life of domestic stress and aesthetic\
      struggle before he came again into the kingdom of his father\'92s\
      love and wealth! And he was gone!\
\
      In the afternoon he and Jolly took picks and spades and went out\
      to the field. They chose a spot close to the russet mound, so\
      that they need not carry him far, and, carefully cutting off the\
      surface turf, began to dig. They dug in silence for ten minutes,\
      and then rested.\
\
      \'93Well, old man,\'94 said Jolyon, \'93so you thought you ought?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 answered Jolly; \'93I don\'92t want to a bit, of course.\'94\
\
      How exactly those words represented Jolyon\'92s own state of mind\
\
      \'93I admire you for it, old boy. I don\'92t believe I should have done\
      it at your age\'97too much of a Forsyte, I\'92m afraid. But I suppose\
      the type gets thinner with each generation. Your son, if you have\
      one, may be a pure altruist; who knows?\'94\
\
      \'93He won\'92t be like me, then, Dad; I\'92m beastly selfish.\'94\
\
      \'93No, my dear, that you clearly are not.\'94 Jolly shook his head,\
      and they dug again.\
\
      \'93Strange life a dog\'92s,\'94 said Jolyon suddenly: \'93The only\
      four-footer with rudiments of altruism and a sense of God!\'94\
\
      Jolly looked at his father.\
\
      \'93Do you believe in God, Dad? I\'92ve never known.\'94\
\
      At so searching a question from one to whom it was impossible to\
      make a light reply, Jolyon stood for a moment feeling his back\
      tried by the digging.\
\
      \'93What do you mean by God?\'94 he said; \'93there are two irreconcilable\
      ideas of God. There\'92s the Unknowable Creative Principle\'97one\
      believes in That. And there\'92s the Sum of altruism in\
      man\'97naturally one believes in That.\'94\
\
      \'93I see. That leaves out Christ, doesn\'92t it?\'94\
\
      Jolyon stared. Christ, the link between those two ideas! Out of\
      the mouth of babes! Here was orthodoxy scientifically explained\
      at last! The sublime poem of the Christ life was man\'92s attempt to\
      join those two irreconcilable conceptions of God. And since the\
      Sum of human altruism was as much a part of the Unknowable\
      Creative Principle as anything else in Nature and the Universe, a\
      worse link might have been chosen after all! Funny\'97how one went\
      through life without seeing it in that sort of way!\
\
      \'93What do _you_ think, old man?\'94 he said.\
\
      Jolly frowned. \'93Of course, my first year we talked a good bit\
      about that sort of thing. But in the second year one gives it up;\
      I don\'92t know why\'97it\'92s awfully interesting.\'94\
\
      Jolyon remembered that he also had talked a good deal about it\
      his first year at Cambridge, and given it up in his second.\
\
      \'93I suppose,\'94 said Jolly, \'93it\'92s the second God, you mean, that old\
      Balthasar had a sense of.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, or he would never have burst his poor old heart because of\
      something outside himself.\'94\
\
      \'93But wasn\'92t that just selfish emotion, really?\'94\
\
      Jolyon shook his head. \'93No, dogs are not pure Forsytes, they love\
      something outside themselves.\'94\
\
      Jolly smiled.\
\
      \'93Well, I think I\'92m one,\'94 he said. \'93You know, I only enlisted\
      because I dared Val Dartie to.\'94\
\
      \'93But why?\'94\
\
      \'93We bar each other,\'94 said Jolly shortly.\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 muttered Jolyon. So the feud went on, unto the third\
      generation\'97this modern feud which had no overt expression?\
\
      \'93Shall I tell the boy about it?\'94 he thought. But to what end\'97if\
      he had to stop short of his own part?\
\
      And Jolly thought: \'93It\'92s for Holly to let him know about that\
      chap. If she doesn\'92t, it means she doesn\'92t want him told, and I\
      should be sneaking. Anyway, I\'92ve stopped it. I\'92d better leave\
      well alone!\'94\
\
      So they dug on in silence, till Jolyon said:\
\
      \'93Now, old man, I think it\'92s big enough.\'94 And, resting on their\
      spades, they gazed down into the hole where a few leaves had\
      drifted already on a sunset wind.\
\
      \'93I can\'92t bear this part of it,\'94 said Jolyon suddenly.\
\
      \'93Let me do it, Dad. He never cared much for me.\'94\
\
      Jolyon shook his head.\
\
      \'93We\'92ll lift him very gently, leaves and all. I\'92d rather not see\
      him again. I\'92ll take his head. Now!\'94\
\
      With extreme care they raised the old dog\'92s body, whose faded tan\
      and white showed here and there under the leaves stirred by the\
      wind. They laid it, heavy, cold, and unresponsive, in the grave,\
      and Jolly spread more leaves over it, while Jolyon, deeply afraid\
      to show emotion before his son, began quickly shovelling the\
      earth on to that still shape. There went the past! If only there\
      were a joyful future to look forward to! It was like stamping\
      down earth on one\'92s own life. They replaced the turf carefully on\
      the smooth little mound, and, grateful that they had spared each\
      other\'92s feelings, returned to the house arm-in-arm.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER XI TIMOTHY STAYS THE ROT\
\
\
      On Forsyte \'92Change news of the enlistment spread fast, together\
      with the report that June, not to be outdone, was going to become\
      a Red Cross nurse. These events were so extreme, so subversive of\
      pure Forsyteism, as to have a binding effect upon the family, and\
      Timothy\'92s was thronged next Sunday afternoon by members trying to\
      find out what they thought about it all, and exchange with each\
      other a sense of family credit. Giles and Jesse Hayman would no\
      longer defend the coast but go to South Africa quite soon; Jolly\
      and Val would be following in April; as to June\'97well, you never\
      knew what she would really do.\
\
      The retirement from Spion Kop and the absence of any good news\
      from the seat of war imparted an air of reality to all this,\
      clinched in startling fashion by Timothy. The youngest of the old\
      Forsytes\'97scarcely eighty, in fact popularly supposed to resemble\
      their father, \'93Superior Dosset,\'94 even in his best-known\
      characteristic of drinking Sherry\'97had been invisible for so many\
      years that he was almost mythical. A long generation had elapsed\
      since the risks of a publisher\'92s business had worked on his\
      nerves at the age of forty, so that he had got out with a mere\
      thirty-five thousand pounds in the world, and started to make his\
      living by careful investment. Putting by every year, at compound\
      interest, he had doubled his capital in forty years without\
      having once known what it was like to shake in his shoes over\
      money matters. He was now putting aside some two thousand a year,\
      and, with the care he was taking of himself, expected, so Aunt\
      Hester said, to double his capital again before he died. What he\
      would do with it then, with his sisters dead and himself dead,\
      was often mockingly queried by free spirits such as Francie,\
      Euphemia, or young Nicholas\'92 second, Christopher, whose spirit\
      was so free that he had actually said he was going on the stage.\
      All admitted, however, that this was best known to Timothy\
      himself, and possibly to Soames, who never divulged a secret.\
\
      Those few Forsytes who had seen him reported a man of thick and\
      robust appearance, not very tall, with a brown-red complexion,\
      grey hair, and little of the refinement of feature with which\
      most of the Forsytes had been endowed by \'93Superior Dosset\'92s\'94\
      wife, a woman of some beauty and a gentle temperament. It was\
      known that he had taken surprising interest in the war, sticking\
      flags into a map ever since it began, and there was uneasiness as\
      to what would happen if the English were driven into the sea,\
      when it would be almost impossible for him to put the flags in\
      the right places. As to his knowledge of family movements or his\
      views about them, little was known, save that Aunt Hester was\
      always declaring that he was very upset. It was, then, in the\
      nature of a portent when Forsytes, arriving on the Sunday after\
      the evacuation of Spion Kop, became conscious, one after the\
      other, of a presence seated in the only really comfortable\
      armchair, back to the light, concealing the lower part of his\
      face with a large hand, and were greeted by the awed voice of\
      Aunt Hester:\
\
      \'93Your Uncle Timothy, my dear.\'94\
\
      Timothy\'92s greeting to them all was somewhat identical; and\
      rather, as it were, passed over by him than expressed:\
\
      \'93How de do? How de do? \'92Xcuse me gettin\'92 up!\'94\
\
      Francie was present, and Eustace had come in his car; Winifred\
      had brought Imogen, breaking the ice of the restitution\
      proceedings with the warmth of family appreciation at Val\'92s\
      enlistment; and Marian Tweetyman with the last news of Giles and\
      Jesse. These with Aunt Juley and Hester, young Nicholas,\
      Euphemia, and\'97of all people!\'97George, who had come with Eustace in\
      the car, constituted an assembly worthy of the family\'92s palmiest\
      days. There was not one chair vacant in the whole of the little\
      drawing-room, and anxiety was felt lest someone else should\
      arrive.\
\
      The constraint caused by Timothy\'92s presence having worn off a\
      little, conversation took a military turn. George asked Aunt\
      Juley when she was going out with the Red Cross, almost reducing\
      her to a state of gaiety; whereon he turned to Nicholas and said:\
\
      \'93Young Nick\'92s a warrior bold, isn\'92t he? When\'92s he going to don\
      the wild khaki?\'94\
\
      Young Nicholas, smiling with a sort of sweet deprecation,\
      intimated that of course his mother was very anxious.\
\
      \'93The Dromios are off, I hear,\'94 said George, turning to Marian\
      Tweetyman; \'93we shall all be there soon. _En avant_, the Forsytes!\
      Roll, bowl, or pitch! Who\'92s for a cooler?\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley gurgled, George was _so_ droll! Should Hester get\
      Timothy\'92s map? Then he could show them all where they were.\
\
      At a sound from Timothy, interpreted as assent, Aunt Hester left\
      the room.\
\
      George pursued his image of the Forsyte advance, addressing\
      Timothy as Field Marshal; and Imogen, whom he had noted at once\
      for \'93a pretty filly,\'94\'97as Vivandi\'e8re; and holding his top hat\
      between his knees, he began to beat it with imaginary drumsticks.\
      The reception accorded to his fantasy was mixed. All\
      laughed\'97George was licensed; but all felt that the family was\
      being \'93rotted\'94; and this seemed to them unnatural, now that it\
      was going to give five of its members to the service of the\
      Queen. George might go too far; and there was relief when he got\
      up, offered his arm to Aunt Juley, marched up to Timothy, saluted\
      him, kissed his aunt with mock passion, said, \'93Oh! what a treat,\
      dear papa! Come on, Eustace!\'94 and walked out, followed by the\
      grave and fastidious Eustace, who had never smiled.\
\
      Aunt Juley\'92s bewildered, \'93Fancy not waiting for the map! You\
      mustn\'92t mind him, Timothy. He\'92s _so_ droll!\'94 broke the hush, and\
      Timothy removed the hand from his mouth.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know what things are comin\'92 to,\'94 he was heard to say.\
      \'93What\'92s all this about goin\'92 out there? That\'92s not the way to\
      beat those Boers.\'94\
\
      Francie alone had the hardihood to observe: \'93What is, then, Uncle\
      Timothy?\'94\
\
      \'93All this new-fangled volunteerin\'92 and expense\'97lettin\'92 money out\
      of the country.\'94\
\
      Just then Aunt Hester brought in the map, handling it like a baby\
      with eruptions. With the assistance of Euphemia it was laid on\
      the piano, a small Colwood grand, last played on, it was\
      believed, the summer before Aunt Ann died, thirteen years ago.\
      Timothy rose. He walked over to the piano, and stood looking at\
      his map while they all gathered round.\
\
      \'93There you are,\'94 he said; \'93that\'92s the position up to date; and\
      very poor it is. H\'92m!\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Francie, greatly daring, \'93but how are you going to\
      alter it, Uncle Timothy, without more men?\'94\
\
      \'93Men!\'94 said Timothy; \'93you don\'92t want men\'97wastin\'92 the country\'92s\
      money. You want a Napoleon, he\'92d settle it in a month.\'94\
\
      \'93But if you haven\'92t got him, Uncle Timothy?\'94\
\
      \'93That\'92s their business,\'94 replied Timothy. \'93What have we kept the\
      Army up for\'97to eat their heads off in time of peace! They ought\
      to be ashamed of themselves, comin\'92 on the country to help them\
      like this! Let every man stick to his business, and we shall get\
      on.\'94\
\
      And looking round him, he added almost angrily:\
\
      \'93Volunteerin\'92, indeed! Throwin\'92 good money after bad! We must\
      save! Conserve energy that\'92s the only way.\'94 And with a prolonged\
      sound, not quite a sniff and not quite a snort, he trod on\
      Euphemia\'92s toe, and went out, leaving a sensation and a faint\
      scent of barley-sugar behind him.\
\
      The effect of something said with conviction by one who has\
      evidently made a sacrifice to say it is ever considerable. And\
      the eight Forsytes left behind, all women except young Nicholas,\
      were silent for a moment round the map. Then Francie said:\
\
      \'93Really, I think he\'92s right, you know. After all, what is the\
      Army for? They ought to have known. It\'92s only encouraging them.\'94\
\
      \'93My dear!\'94 cried Aunt Juley, \'93but they\'92ve been so progressive.\
      Think of their giving up their scarlet. They were always so proud\
      of it. And now they all look like convicts. Hester and I were\
      saying only yesterday we were sure they must feel it very much.\
      Fancy what the Iron Duke would have said!\'94\
\
      \'93The new colour\'92s very smart,\'94 said Winifred; \'93Val looks quite\
      nice in his.\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley sighed.\
\
      \'93I do so wonder what Jolyon\'92s boy is like. To think we\'92ve never\
      seen him! His father must be so proud of him.\'94\
\
      \'93His father\'92s in Paris,\'94 said Winifred.\
\
      Aunt Hester\'92s shoulder was seen to mount suddenly, as if to ward\
      off her sister\'92s next remark, for Juley\'92s crumpled cheeks had\
      gushed.\
\
      \'93We had dear little Mrs. MacAnder here yesterday, just back from\
      Paris. And whom d\'92you think she saw there in the street? You\'92ll\
      never guess.\'94\
\
      \'93We shan\'92t try, Auntie,\'94 said Euphemia.\
\
      \'93Irene! Imagine! After all this time; walking with a fair\
      beard....\'94\
\
      \'93Auntie! you\'92ll kill me! A fair beard....\'94\
\
      \'93I was going to say,\'94 said Aunt Juley severely, \'93a fair-bearded\
      gentleman. And not a day older; she was always so pretty,\'94 she\
      added, with a sort of lingering apology.\
\
      \'93Oh! tell us about her, Auntie,\'94 cried Imogen; \'93I can just\
      remember her. She\'92s the skeleton in the family cupboard, isn\'92t\
      she? And they\'92re such fun.\'94\
\
      Aunt Hester sat down. Really, Juley had done it now!\
\
      \'93She wasn\'92t much of a skeleton as I remember her,\'94 murmured\
      Euphemia, \'93extremely well-covered.\'94\
\
      \'93My dear!\'94 said Aunt Juley, \'93what a peculiar way of putting\
      it\'97not very nice.\'94\
\
      \'93No, but what _was_ she like?\'94 persisted Imogen.\
\
      \'93I\'92ll tell you, my child,\'94 said Francie; \'93a kind of modern Venus,\
      very well-dressed.\'94\
\
      Euphemia said sharply: \'93Venus was never dressed, and she had blue\
      eyes of melting sapphire.\'94\
\
      At this juncture Nicholas took his leave.\
\
      \'93Mrs. Nick is awfully strict,\'94 said Francie with a laugh.\
\
      \'93She has six children,\'94 said Aunt Juley; \'93it\'92s very proper she\
      should be careful.\'94\
\
      \'93Was Uncle Soames awfully fond of her?\'94 pursued the inexorable\
      Imogen, moving her dark luscious eyes from face to face.\
\
      Aunt Hester made a gesture of despair, just as Aunt Juley\
      answered:\
\
      \'93Yes, your Uncle Soames was very much attached to her.\'94\
\
      \'93I suppose she ran off with someone?\'94\
\
      \'93No, certainly not; that is\'97not precisely.\'94\
\
      \'93What did she do, then, Auntie?\'94\
\
      \'93Come along, Imogen,\'94 said Winifred, \'93we must be getting back.\'94\
\
      But Aunt Juley interjected resolutely: \'93She\'97she didn\'92t behave at\
      all well.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, bother!\'94 cried Imogen; \'93that\'92s as far as I ever get.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, my dear,\'94 said Francie, \'93she had a love affair which ended\
      with the young man\'92s death; and then she left your uncle. I\
      always rather liked her.\'94\
\
      \'93She used to give me chocolates,\'94 murmured Imogen, \'93and smell\
      nice.\'94\
\
      \'93Of course!\'94 remarked Euphemia.\
\
      \'93Not of course at all!\'94 replied Francie, who used a particularly\
      expensive essence of gillyflower herself.\
\
      \'93I can\'92t think what we are about,\'94 said Aunt Juley, raising her\
      hands, \'93talking of such things!\'94\
\
      \'93Was she divorced?\'94 asked Imogen from the door.\
\
      \'93Certainly not,\'94 cried Aunt Juley; \'93that is\'97certainly not.\'94\
\
      A sound was heard over by the far door. Timothy had re-entered\
      the back drawing-room. \'93I\'92ve come for my map,\'94 he said. \'93Who\'92s\
      been divorced?\'94\
\
      \'93No one, Uncle,\'94 replied Francie with perfect truth.\
\
      Timothy took his map off the piano.\
\
      \'93Don\'92t let\'92s have anything of that sort in the family,\'94 he said.\
      \'93All this enlistin\'92s bad enough. The country\'92s breakin\'92 up; I\
      don\'92t know what we\'92re comin\'92 to.\'94 He shook a thick finger at the\
      room: \'93Too many women nowadays, and they don\'92t know what they\
      want.\'94\
\
      So saying, he grasped the map firmly with both hands, and went\
      out as if afraid of being answered.\
\
      The seven women whom he had addressed broke into a subdued\
      murmur, out of which emerged Francie\'92s, \'93Really, the Forsytes!\'94\
      and Aunt Juley\'92s: \'93He must have his feet in mustard and hot water\
      to-night, Hester; will you tell Jane? The blood has gone to his\
      head again, I\'92m afraid....\'94\
\
      That evening, when she and Hester were sitting alone after\
      dinner, she dropped a stitch in her crochet, and looked up:\
\
      \'93Hester, I can\'92t think where I\'92ve heard that dear Soames wants\
      Irene to come back to him again. Who was it told us that George\
      had made a funny drawing of him with the words, \'91He won\'92t be\
      happy till he gets it\'92.\'94\
\
      \'93Eustace,\'94 answered Aunt Hester from behind _The Times;_ \'93he had\
      it in his pocket, but he wouldn\'92t show it us.\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley was silent, ruminating. The clock ticked, _The Times_\
      crackled, the fire sent forth its rustling purr. Aunt Juley\
      dropped another stitch.\
\
      \'93Hester,\'94 she said, \'93I have had such a dreadful thought.\'94\
\
      \'93Then don\'92t tell me,\'94 said Aunt Hester quickly.\
\
      \'93Oh! but I must. You can\'92t think how dreadful!\'94 Her voice sank to\
      a whisper:\
\
      \'93Jolyon\'97Jolyon, they say, has a\'97has a fair beard, now.\'94\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER XII PROGRESS OF THE CHASE\
\
\
      Two days after the dinner at James\'92, Mr. Polteed provided Soames\
      with food for thought.\
\
      \'93A gentleman,\'94 he said, consulting the key concealed in his left\
      hand, \'9347 as we say, has been paying marked attention to 17\
      during the last month in Paris. But at present there seems to\
      have been nothing very conclusive. The meetings have all been in\
      public places, without concealment\'97restaurants, the Opera, the\
      Comique, the Louvre, Luxembourg Gardens, lounge of the hotel, and\
      so forth. She has not yet been traced to his rooms, nor _vice\
      versa_. They went to Fontainebleau\'97but nothing of value. In\
      short, the situation is promising, but requires patience.\'94 And,\
      looking up suddenly, he added:\
\
      \'93One rather curious point\'9747 has the same name as\'97er\'9731!\'94\
\
      \'93The fellow knows I\'92m her husband,\'94 thought Soames.\
\
      \'93Christian name\'97an odd one\'97Jolyon,\'94 continued Mr. Polteed. \'93We\
      know his address in Paris and his residence here. We don\'92t wish,\
      of course, to be running a wrong hare.\'94\
\
      \'93Go on with it, but be careful,\'94 said Soames doggedly.\
\
      Instinctive certainty that this detective fellow had fathomed his\
      secret made him all the more reticent.\
\
      \'93Excuse me,\'94 said Mr. Polteed, \'93I\'92ll just see if there\'92s anything\
      fresh in.\'94\
\
      He returned with some letters. Relocking the door, he glanced at\
      the envelopes.\
\
      \'93Yes, here\'92s a personal one from 19 to myself.\'94\
\
      \'93Well?\'94 said Soames.\
\
      \'93Um!\'94 said Mr. Polteed, \'93she says: \'9147 left for England to-day.\
      Address on his baggage: Robin Hill. Parted from 17 in Louvre\
      Gallery at 3.30; nothing very striking. Thought it best to stay\
      and continue observation of 17. You will deal with 47 in England\
      if you think desirable, no doubt.\'92\'94 And Mr. Polteed lifted an\
      unprofessional glance on Soames, as though he might be storing\
      material for a book on human nature after he had gone out of\
      business. \'93Very intelligent woman, 19, and a wonderful make-up.\
      Not cheap, but earns her money well. There\'92s no suspicion of\
      being shadowed so far. But after a time, as you know, sensitive\
      people are liable to get the feeling of it, without anything\
      definite to go on. I should rather advise letting-up on 17, and\
      keeping an eye on 47. We can\'92t get at correspondence without\
      great risk. I hardly advise that at this stage. But you can tell\
      your client that it\'92s looking up very well.\'94 And again his\
      narrowed eyes gleamed at his taciturn customer.\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Soames suddenly, \'93I prefer that you should keep the\
      watch going discreetly in Paris, and not concern yourself with\
      this end.\'94\
\
      \'93Very well,\'94 replied Mr. Polteed, \'93we can do it.\'94\
\
      \'93What\'97what is the manner between them?\'94\
\
      \'93I\'92ll read you what she says,\'94 said Mr. Polteed, unlocking a\
      bureau drawer and taking out a file of papers; \'93she sums it up\
      somewhere confidentially. Yes, here it is! \'9117 very\
      attractive\'97conclude 47, longer in the tooth\'92 (slang for age, you\
      know)\'97\'91distinctly gone\'97waiting his time\'9717 perhaps holding off\
      for terms, impossible to say without knowing more. But inclined\
      to think on the whole\'97doesn\'92t know her mind\'97likely to act on\
      impulse some day. Both have style.\'92\'94\
\
      \'93What does that mean?\'94 said Soames between close lips.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 murmured Mr. Polteed with a smile, showing many white\
      teeth, \'93an expression we use. In other words, it\'92s not likely to\
      be a weekend business\'97they\'92ll come together seriously or not at\
      all.\'94\
\
      \'93H\'92m!\'94 muttered Soames, \'93that\'92s all, is it?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Mr. Polteed, \'93but quite promising.\'94\
\
      \'93Spider!\'94 thought Soames. \'93Good-day!\'94\
\
      He walked into the Green Park that he might cross to Victoria\
      Station and take the Underground into the City. For so late in\
      January it was warm; sunlight, through the haze, sparkled on the\
      frosty grass\'97an illumined cobweb of a day.\
\
      Little spiders\'97and great spiders! And the greatest spinner of\
      all, his own tenacity, for ever wrapping its cocoon of threads\
      round any clear way out. What was that fellow hanging round Irene\
      for? Was it really as Polteed suggested? Or was Jolyon but taking\
      compassion on her loneliness, as he would call it\'97sentimental\
      radical chap that he had always been? If it were, indeed, as\
      Polteed hinted! Soames stood still. It could not be! The fellow\
      was seven years older than himself, no better looking! No richer!\
      What attraction had he?\
\
      \'93Besides, he\'92s come back,\'94 he thought; \'93that doesn\'92t look\'97I\'92ll go\
      and see him!\'94 and, taking out a card, he wrote:\
\
      \'93If you can spare half an hour some afternoon this week, I shall\
      be at the Connoisseurs any day between 5.30 and 6, or I could\
      come to the Hotch Potch if you prefer it. I want to see you.\'97S.\
      F.\'94\
\
      He walked up St. James\'92s Street and confided it to the porter at\
      the Hotch Potch.\
\
      \'93Give Mr. Jolyon Forsyte this as soon as he comes in,\'94 he said,\
      and took one of the new motor cabs into the City....\
\
      Jolyon received that card the same afternoon, and turned his face\
      towards the Connoisseurs. What did Soames want now? Had he got\
      wind of Paris? And stepping across St. James\'92s Street, he\
      determined to make no secret of his visit. \'93But it won\'92t do,\'94 he\
      thought, \'93to let him know _she\'92s_ there, unless he knows\
      already.\'94 In this complicated state of mind he was conducted to\
      where Soames was drinking tea in a small bay-window.\
\
      \'93No tea, thanks,\'94 said Jolyon, \'93but I\'92ll go on smoking if I may.\'94\
\
      The curtains were not yet drawn, though the lamps outside were\
      lighted; the two cousins sat waiting on each other.\
\
      \'93You\'92ve been in Paris, I hear,\'94 said Soames at last.\
\
      \'93Yes; just back.\'94\
\
      \'93Young Val told me; he and your boy are going off, then?\'94 Jolyon\
      nodded.\
\
      \'93You didn\'92t happen to see Irene, I suppose. It appears she\'92s\
      abroad somewhere.\'94\
\
      Jolyon wreathed himself in smoke before he answered: \'93Yes, I saw\
      her.\'94\
\
      \'93How was she?\'94\
\
      \'93Very well.\'94\
\
      There was another silence; then Soames roused himself in his\
      chair.\
\
      \'93When I saw you last,\'94 he said, \'93I was in two minds. We talked,\
      and you expressed your opinion. I don\'92t wish to reopen that\
      discussion. I only wanted to say this: My position with her is\
      extremely difficult. I don\'92t want you to go using your influence\
      against me. What happened is a very long time ago. I\'92m going to\
      ask her to let bygones be bygones.\'94\
\
      \'93You have asked her, you know,\'94 murmured Jolyon.\
\
      \'93The idea was new to her then; it came as a shock. But the more\
      she thinks of it, the more she must see that it\'92s the only way\
      out for both of us.\'94\
\
      \'93That\'92s not my impression of her state of mind,\'94 said Jolyon with\
      particular calm. \'93And, forgive my saying, you misconceive the\
      matter if you think reason comes into it at all.\'94\
\
      He saw his cousin\'92s pale face grow paler\'97he had used, without\
      knowing it, Irene\'92s own words.\
\
      \'93Thanks,\'94 muttered Soames, \'93but I see things perhaps more plainly\
      than you think. I only want to be sure that you won\'92t try to\
      influence her against me.\'94\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know what makes you think I have any influence,\'94 said\
      Jolyon; \'93but if I have I\'92m bound to use it in the direction of\
      what I think is her happiness. I am what they call a \'91feminist,\'92\
      I believe.\'94\
\
      \'93Feminist!\'94 repeated Soames, as if seeking to gain time. \'93Does\
      that mean that you\'92re against me?\'94\
\
      \'93Bluntly,\'94 said Jolyon, \'93I\'92m against any woman living with any\
      man whom she definitely dislikes. It appears to me rotten.\'94\
\
      \'93And I suppose each time you see her you put your opinions into\
      her mind.\'94\
\
      \'93I am not likely to be seeing her.\'94\
\
      \'93Not going back to Paris?\'94\
\
      \'93Not so far as I know,\'94 said Jolyon, conscious of the intent\
      watchfulness in Soames\'92 face.\
\
      \'93Well, that\'92s all I had to say. Anyone who comes between man and\
      wife, you know, incurs heavy responsibility.\'94\
\
      Jolyon rose and made him a slight bow.\
\
      \'93Good-bye,\'94 he said, and, without offering to shake hands, moved\
      away, leaving Soames staring after him. \'93We Forsytes,\'94 thought\
      Jolyon, hailing a cab, \'93are very civilised. With simpler folk\
      that might have come to a row. If it weren\'92t for my boy going to\
      the war....\'94 The war! A gust of his old doubt swept over him. A\
      precious war! Domination of peoples or of women! Attempts to\
      master and possess those who did not want you! The negation of\
      gentle decency! Possession, vested rights; and anyone \'91agin\'92\
      \'92em\'97outcast! \'93Thank Heaven!\'94 he thought, \'93_I always_ felt \'91agin\'92\
      \'92em, anyway!\'94 Yes! Even before his first disastrous marriage he\
      could remember fuming over the bludgeoning of Ireland, or the\
      matrimonial suits of women trying to be free of men they loathed.\
      Parsons would have it that freedom of soul and body were quite\
      different things! Pernicious doctrine! Body and soul could not\
      thus be separated. Free will was the strength of any tie, and not\
      its weakness. \'93I ought to have told Soames,\'94 he thought, \'93that I\
      think him comic. Ah! but he\'92s tragic, too!\'94 Was there anything,\
      indeed, more tragic in the world than a man enslaved by his own\
      possessive instinct, who couldn\'92t see the sky for it, or even\
      enter fully into what another person felt! \'93I must write and warn\
      her,\'94 he thought; \'93he\'92s going to have another try.\'94 And all the\
      way home to Robin Hill he rebelled at the strength of that duty\
      to his son which prevented him from posting back to Paris....\
\
      But Soames sat long in his chair, the prey of a no less gnawing\
      ache\'97a jealous ache, as if it had been revealed to him that this\
      fellow held precedence of himself, and had spun fresh threads of\
      resistance to his way out. \'93Does that mean that you\'92re against\
      me?\'94 he had got nothing out of that disingenuous question.\
      Feminist! Phrasey fellow! \'93I mustn\'92t rush things,\'94 he thought. \'93I\
      have some breathing space; he\'92s not going back to Paris, unless\
      he was lying. I\'92ll let the spring come!\'94 Though how the spring\
      could serve him, save by adding to his ache, he could not tell.\
      And gazing down into the street, where figures were passing from\
      pool to pool of the light from the high lamps, he thought:\
      \'93Nothing seems any good\'97nothing seems worth while. I\'92m\
      lonely\'97that\'92s the trouble.\'94\
\
      He closed his eyes; and at once he seemed to see Irene, in a dark\
      street below a church\'97passing, turning her neck so that he caught\
      the gleam of her eyes and her white forehead under a little dark\
      hat, which had gold spangles on it and a veil hanging down\
      behind. He opened his eyes\'97so vividly he had seen her! A woman\
      _was_ passing below, but not she! Oh no, there was nothing there!\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER XIII \'93HERE WE ARE AGAIN!\'94\
\
\
      Imogen\'92s frocks for her first season exercised the judgment of\
      her mother and the purse of her grandfather all through the month\
      of March. With Forsyte tenacity Winifred quested for perfection.\
      It took her mind off the slowly approaching rite which would give\
      her a freedom but doubtfully desired; took her mind, too, off her\
      boy and his fast approaching departure for a war from which the\
      news remained disquieting. Like bees busy on summer flowers, or\
      bright gadflies hovering and darting over spiky autumn blossoms,\
      she and her \'93little daughter,\'94 tall nearly as herself and with a\
      bust measurement not far inferior, hovered in the shops of Regent\
      Street, the establishments of Hanover Square and of Bond Street,\
      lost in consideration and the feel of fabrics. Dozens of young\
      women of striking deportment and peculiar gait paraded before\
      Winifred and Imogen, draped in \'93creations.\'94 The models\'97\'93Very new,\
      modom; quite the latest thing\'97\'94 which those two reluctantly\
      turned down, would have filled a museum; the models which they\
      were obliged to have nearly emptied James\'92 bank. It was no good\
      doing things by halves, Winifred felt, in view of the need for\
      making this first and sole untarnished season a conspicuous\
      success. Their patience in trying the patience of those\
      impersonal creatures who swam about before them could alone have\
      been displayed by such as were moved by faith. It was for\
      Winifred a long prostration before her dear goddess Fashion,\
      fervent as a Catholic might make before the Virgin; for Imogen an\
      experience by no means too unpleasant\'97she often looked so nice,\
      and flattery was implicit everywhere: in a word it was \'93amusing.\'94\
\
      On the afternoon of the 20th of March, having, as it were, gutted\
      Skywards, they had sought refreshment over the way at Caramel and\
      Baker\'92s, and, stored with chocolate frothed at the top with\
      cream, turned homewards through Berkeley Square of an evening\
      touched with spring. Opening the door\'97freshly painted a light\
      olive-green; nothing neglected that year to give Imogen a good\
      send-off\'97Winifred passed towards the silver basket to see if\
      anyone had called, and suddenly her nostrils twitched. What was\
      that scent?\
\
      Imogen had taken up a novel sent from the library, and stood\
      absorbed. Rather sharply, because of the queer feeling in her\
      breast, Winifred said:\
\
      \'93Take that up, dear, and have a rest before dinner.\'94\
\
      Imogen, still reading, passed up the stairs. Winifred heard the\
      door of her room slammed to, and drew a long savouring breath.\
      Was it spring tickling her senses\'97whipping up nostalgia for her\
      \'93clown,\'94 against all wisdom and outraged virtue? A male scent! A\
      faint reek of cigars and lavender-water not smelt since that\
      early autumn night six months ago, when she had called him \'93the\
      limit.\'94 Whence came it, or was it ghost of scent\'97sheer emanation\
      from memory? She looked round her. Nothing\'97not a thing, no\
      tiniest disturbance of her hall, nor of the diningroom. A little\
      day-dream of a scent\'97illusory, saddening, silly! In the silver\
      basket were new cards, two with \'93Mr. and Mrs. Polegate Thom,\'94 and\
      one with \'93Mr. Polegate Thom\'94 thereon; she sniffed them, but they\
      smelled severe. \'93I must be tired,\'94 she thought, \'93I\'92ll go and lie\
      down.\'94 Upstairs the drawing-room was darkened, waiting for some\
      hand to give it evening light; and she passed on up to her\
      bedroom. This, too, was half-curtained and dim, for it was six\
      o\'92clock. Winifred threw off her coat\'97that scent again!\'97then\
      stood, as if shot, transfixed against the bed-rail. Something\
      dark had risen from the sofa in the far corner. A word of\
      horror\'97in her family\'97escaped her: \'93God!\'94\
\
      \'93It\'92s I\'97Monty,\'94 said a voice.\
\
      Clutching the bed-rail, Winifred reached up and turned the switch\
      of the light hanging above her dressing-table. He appeared just\
      on the rim of the light\'92s circumference, emblazoned from the\
      absence of his watch-chain down to boots neat and sooty brown,\
      but\'97yes!\'97split at the toecap. His chest and face were shadowy.\
      Surely he was thin\'97or was it a trick of the light? He advanced,\
      lighted now from toe-cap to the top of his dark head\'97surely a\
      little grizzled! His complexion had darkened, sallowed; his black\
      moustache had lost boldness, become sardonic; there were lines\
      which she did not know about his face. There was no pin in his\
      tie. His suit\'97ah!\'97she knew that\'97but how unpressed, unglossy! She\
      stared again at the toe-cap of his boot. Something big and\
      relentless had been \'93at him,\'94 had turned and twisted, raked and\
      scraped him. And she stayed, not speaking, motionless, staring at\
      that crack across the toe.\
\
      \'93Well!\'94 he said, \'93I got the order. I\'92m back.\'94\
\
      Winifred\'92s bosom began to heave. The nostalgia for her husband\
      which had rushed up with that scent was struggling with a deeper\
      jealousy than any she had felt yet. There he was\'97a dark, and as\
      if harried, shadow of his sleek and brazen self! What force had\
      done this to him\'97squeezed him like an orange to its dry rind!\
      That woman!\
\
      \'93I\'92m back,\'94 he said again. \'93I\'92ve had a beastly time. By God! I\
      came steerage. I\'92ve got nothing but what I stand up in, and that\
      bag.\'94\
\
      \'93And who has the rest?\'94 cried Winifred, suddenly alive. \'93How\
      dared you come? You knew it was just for divorce that you got\
      that order to come back. Don\'92t touch me!\'94\
\
      They held each to the rail of the big bed where they had spent so\
      many years of nights together. Many times, yes\'97many times she had\
      wanted him back. But now that he had come she was filled with\
      this cold and deadly resentment. He put his hand up to his\
      moustache; but did not frizz and twist it in the old familiar\
      way, he just pulled it downwards.\
\
      \'93Gad!\'94 he said: \'93If you knew the time I\'92ve had!\'94\
\
      \'93I\'92m glad I don\'92t!\'94\
\
      \'93Are the kids all right?\'94\
\
      Winifred nodded. \'93How did you get in?\'94\
\
      \'93With my key.\'94\
\
      \'93Then the maids don\'92t know. You can\'92t stay here, Monty.\'94\
\
      He uttered a little sardonic laugh.\
\
      \'93Where then?\'94\
\
      \'93Anywhere.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, look at me! That\'97that damned....\'94\
\
      \'93If you mention _her_,\'94 cried Winifred, \'93I go straight out to\
      Park Lane and I don\'92t come back.\'94\
\
      Suddenly he did a simple thing, but so uncharacteristic that it\
      moved her. He shut his eyes. It was as if he had said: \'93All\
      right! I\'92m dead to the world!\'94\
\
      \'93You can have a room for the night,\'94 she said; \'93your things are\
      still here. Only Imogen is at home.\'94\
\
      He leaned back against the bed-rail. \'93Well, it\'92s in your hands,\'94\
      and his own made a writhing movement. \'93I\'92ve been through it. You\
      needn\'92t hit too hard\'97it isn\'92t worth while. I\'92ve been frightened;\
      I\'92ve been frightened, Freddie.\'94\
\
      That old pet name, disused for years and years, sent a shiver\
      through Winifred.\
\
      \'93What am I to do with him?\'94 she thought. \'93What in God\'92s name am I\
      to do with him?\'94\
\
      \'93Got a cigarette?\'94\
\
      She gave him one from a little box she kept up there for when she\
      couldn\'92t sleep at night, and lighted it. With that action the\
      matter-of-fact side of her nature came to life again.\
\
      \'93Go and have a hot bath. I\'92ll put some clothes out for you in the\
      dressing-room. We can talk later.\'94\
\
      He nodded, and fixed his eyes on her\'97they looked half-dead, or\
      was it that the folds in the lids had become heavier?\
\
      \'93He\'92s not the same,\'94 she thought. He would never be quite the\
      same again! But what would he be?\
\
      \'93All right!\'94 he said, and went towards the door. He even moved\
      differently, like a man who has lost illusion and doubts whether\
      it is worth while to move at all.\
\
      When he was gone, and she heard the water in the bath running,\
      she put out a complete set of garments on the bed in his\
      dressing-room, then went downstairs and fetched up the biscuit\
      box and whisky. Putting on her coat again, and listening a moment\
      at the bathroom door, she went down and out. In the street she\
      hesitated. Past seven o\'92clock! Would Soames be at his Club or at\
      Park Lane? She turned towards the latter. Back!\
\
      Soames had always feared it\'97she had sometimes hoped it.... Back!\
      So like him\'97clown that he was\'97with this: \'93Here we are again!\'94 to\
      make fools of them all\'97of the Law, of Soames, of herself!\
\
      Yet to have done with the Law, not to have that murky cloud\
      hanging over her and the children! What a relief! Ah! but how to\
      accept his return? That \'93woman\'94 had ravaged him, taken from him\
      passion such as he had never bestowed on herself, such as she had\
      not thought him capable of. There was the sting! That selfish,\
      blatant \'93clown\'94 of hers, whom she herself had never really\
      stirred, had been swept and ungarnished by another woman!\
      Insulting! Too insulting! Not right, not decent to take him back!\
      And yet she had asked for him; the Law perhaps would make her\
      now! He was as much her husband as ever\'97she had put herself out\
      of court! And all he wanted, no doubt, was money\'97to keep him in\
      cigars and lavender-water! That scent! \'93After all, I\'92m not old,\'94\
      she thought, \'93not old yet!\'94 But that woman who had reduced him to\
      those words: \'93I\'92ve been through it. I\'92ve been\
      frightened\'97frightened, Freddie!\'94 She neared her father\'92s house,\
      driven this way and that, while all the time the Forsyte undertow\
      was drawing her to deep conclusion that after all he was her\
      property, to be held against a robbing world. And so she came to\
      James\'92.\
\
      \'93Mr. Soames? In his room? I\'92ll go up; don\'92t say I\'92m here.\'94\
\
      Her brother was dressing. She found him before a mirror, tying a\
      black bow with an air of despising its ends.\
\
      \'93Hullo!\'94 he said, contemplating her in the glass; \'93what\'92s wrong?\'94\
\
      \'93Monty!\'94 said Winifred stonily.\
\
      Soames spun round. \'93What!\'94\
\
      \'93Back!\'94\
\
      \'93Hoist,\'94 muttered Soames, \'93with our own petard. Why the deuce\
      didn\'92t you let me try cruelty? I always knew it was too much risk\
      this way.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! Don\'92t talk about that! What shall I do?\'94\
\
      Soames answered, with a deep, deep sound.\
\
      \'93Well?\'94 said Winifred impatiently.\
\
      \'93What has he to say for himself?\'94\
\
      \'93Nothing. One of his boots is split across the toe.\'94\
\
      Soames stared at her.\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 he said, \'93of course! On his beam ends. So\'97it begins again!\
      This\'92ll about finish father.\'94\
\
      \'93Can\'92t we keep it from him?\'94\
\
      \'93Impossible. He has an uncanny flair for anything that\'92s\
      worrying.\'94\
\
      And he brooded, with fingers hooked into his blue silk braces.\
      \'93There ought to be some way in law,\'94 he muttered, \'93to make him\
      safe.\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 cried Winifred, \'93I won\'92t be made a fool of again; I\'92d\
      sooner put up with him.\'94\
\
      The two stared at each other. Their hearts were full of feeling,\
      but they could give it no expression\'97Forsytes that they were.\
\
      \'93Where did you leave him?\'94\
\
      \'93In the bath,\'94 and Winifred gave a little bitter laugh. \'93The only\
      thing he\'92s brought back is lavender-water.\'94\
\
      \'93Steady!\'94 said Soames, \'93you\'92re thoroughly upset. I\'92ll go back\
      with you.\'94\
\
      \'93What\'92s the use?\'94\
\
      \'93We ought to make terms with him.\'94\
\
      \'93Terms! It\'92ll always be the same. When he recovers\'97cards and\
      betting, drink and...!\'94 She was silent, remembering the look on\
      her husband\'92s face. The burnt child\'97the burnt child. Perhaps...!\
\
      \'93Recovers?\'94 replied Soames: \'93Is he ill?\'94\
\
      \'93No; burnt out; that\'92s all.\'94\
\
      Soames took his waistcoat from a chair and put it on, he took his\
      coat and got into it, he scented his handkerchief with\
      eau-de-Cologne, threaded his watch-chain, and said: \'93We haven\'92t\
      any luck.\'94\
\
      And in the midst of her own trouble Winifred was sorry for him,\
      as if in that little saying he had revealed deep trouble of his\
      own.\
\
      \'93I\'92d like to see mother,\'94 she said.\
\
      \'93She\'92ll be with father in their room. Come down quietly to the\
      study. I\'92ll get her.\'94\
\
      Winifred stole down to the little dark study, chiefly remarkable\
      for a Canaletto too doubtful to be placed elsewhere, and a fine\
      collection of Law Reports unopened for many years. Here she\
      stood, with her back to maroon-coloured curtains close-drawn,\
      staring at the empty grate, till her mother came in followed by\
      Soames.\
\
      \'93Oh! my poor dear!\'94 said Emily: \'93How miserable you look in here!\
      This is too bad of him, really!\'94\
\
      As a family they had so guarded themselves from the expression of\
      all unfashionable emotion that it was impossible to go up and\
      give her daughter a good hug. But there was comfort in her\
      cushioned voice, and her still dimpled shoulders under some rare\
      black lace. Summoning pride and the desire not to distress her\
      mother, Winifred said in her most off-hand voice:\
\
      \'93It\'92s all right, Mother; no good fussing.\'94\
\
      \'93I don\'92t see,\'94 said Emily, looking at Soames, \'93why Winifred\
      shouldn\'92t tell him that she\'92ll prosecute him if he doesn\'92t keep\
      off the premises. He took her pearls; and if he\'92s not brought\
      them back, that\'92s quite enough.\'94\
\
      Winifred smiled. They would all plunge about with suggestions of\
      this and that, but she knew already what she would be doing, and\
      that was\'97nothing. The feeling that, after all, she had won a sort\
      of victory, retained her property, was every moment gaining\
      ground in her. No! if she wanted to punish him, she could do it\
      at home without the world knowing.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Emily, \'93come into the dining-room comfortably\'97you\
      must stay and have dinner with us. Leave it to me to tell your\
      father.\'94 And, as Winifred moved towards the door, she turned out\
      the light. Not till then did they see the disaster in the\
      corridor.\
\
      There, attracted by light from a room never lighted, James was\
      standing with his duncoloured camel-hair shawl folded about him,\
      so that his arms were not free and his silvered head looked cut\
      off from his fashionably trousered legs as if by an expanse of\
      desert. He stood, inimitably stork-like, with an expression as if\
      he saw before him a frog too large to swallow.\
\
      \'93What\'92s all this?\'94 he said. \'93Tell your father? You never tell me\
      anything.\'94\
\
      The moment found Emily without reply. It was Winifred who went up\
      to him, and, laying one hand on each of his swathed, helpless\
      arms, said:\
\
      \'93Monty\'92s not gone bankrupt, Father. He\'92s only come back.\'94\
\
      They all three expected something serious to happen, and were\
      glad she had kept that grip of his arms, but they did not know\
      the depth of root in that shadowy old Forsyte. Something wry\
      occurred about his shaven mouth and chin, something scratchy\
      between those long silvery whiskers. Then he said with a sort of\
      dignity: \'93He\'92ll be the death of me. I knew how it would be.\'94\
\
      \'93You mustn\'92t worry, Father,\'94 said Winifred calmly. \'93I mean to\
      make him behave.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 said James. \'93Here, take this thing off, I\'92m hot.\'94 They\
      unwound the shawl. He turned, and walked firmly to the\
      dining-room.\
\
      \'93I don\'92t want any soup,\'94 he said to Warmson, and sat down in his\
      chair. They all sat down too, Winifred still in her hat, while\
      Warmson laid the fourth place. When he left the room, James said:\
      \'93What\'92s he brought back?\'94\
\
      \'93Nothing, Father.\'94\
\
      James concentrated his eyes on his own image in a tablespoon.\
      \'93Divorce!\'94 he muttered; \'93rubbish! What was I about? I ought to\
      have paid him an allowance to stay out of England. Soames you go\
      and propose it to him.\'94\
\
      It seemed so right and simple a suggestion that even Winifred was\
      surprised when she said: \'93No, I\'92ll keep him now he\'92s back; he\
      must just behave\'97that\'92s all.\'94\
\
      They all looked at her. It had always been known that Winifred\
      had pluck.\
\
      \'93Out there!\'94 said James elliptically, \'93who knows what\
      cut-throats! You look for his revolver! Don\'92t go to bed without.\
      You ought to have Warmson to sleep in the house. I\'92ll see him\
      myself tomorrow.\'94\
\
      They were touched by this declaration, and Emily said\
      comfortably: \'93That\'92s right, James, we won\'92t have any nonsense.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 muttered James darkly, \'93I can\'92t tell.\'94\
\
      The advent of Warmson with fish diverted conversation.\
\
      When, directly after dinner, Winifred went over to kiss her\
      father good-night, he looked up with eyes so full of question and\
      distress that she put all the comfort she could into her voice.\
\
      \'93It\'92s all right, Daddy, dear; don\'92t worry. I shan\'92t need\
      anyone\'97he\'92s quite bland. I shall only be upset if you worry.\
      Good-night, bless you!\'94\
\
      James repeated the words, \'93Bless you!\'94 as if he did not quite\
      know what they meant, and his eyes followed her to the door.\
\
      She reached home before nine, and went straight upstairs.\
\
      Dartie was lying on the bed in his dressing-room, fully redressed\
      in a blue serge suit and pumps; his arms were crossed behind his\
      head, and an extinct cigarette drooped from his mouth.\
\
      Winifred remembered ridiculously the flowers in her window-boxes\
      after a blazing summer day; the way they lay, or rather\
      stood\'97parched, yet rested by the sun\'92s retreat. It was as if a\
      little dew had come already on her burnt-up husband.\
\
      He said apathetically: \'93I suppose you\'92ve been to Park Lane. How\'92s\
      the old man?\'94\
\
      Winifred could not help the bitter answer: \'93Not dead.\'94\
\
      He winced, actually he winced.\
\
      \'93Understand, Monty,\'94 she said, \'93I will _not_ have him worried. If\
      you aren\'92t going to behave yourself, you may go back, you may go\
      anywhere. Have you had dinner?\'94\
\
      No.\
\
      \'93Would you like some?\'94\
\
      He shrugged his shoulders.\
\
      \'93Imogen offered me some. I didn\'92t want any.\'94\
\
      Imogen! In the plenitude of emotion Winifred had forgotten her.\
\
      \'93So you\'92ve seen her? What did she say?\'94\
\
      \'93She gave me a kiss.\'94\
\
      With mortification Winifred saw his dark sardonic face relaxed.\
      \'93Yes!\'94 she thought, \'93he cares for her, not for me a bit.\'94\
\
      Dartie\'92s eyes were moving from side to side.\
\
      \'93Does she know about me?\'94 he said.\
\
      It flashed through Winifred that here was the weapon she needed.\
      _He minded their knowing!_\
\
      \'93No. Val knows. The others don\'92t; they only know you went away.\'94\
\
      She heard him sigh with relief.\
\
      \'93But they _shall_ know,\'94 she said firmly, \'93if you give me cause.\'94\
\
      \'93All right!\'94 he muttered, \'93hit me! I\'92m down!\'94\
\
      Winifred went up to the bed. \'93Look here, Monty! I don\'92t want to\
      hit you. I don\'92t want to hurt you. I shan\'92t allude to anything.\
      I\'92m not going to worry. What\'92s the use?\'94 She was silent a moment.\
      \'93I can\'92t stand any more, though, and I won\'92t! You\'92d better know.\
      You\'92ve made me suffer. But I used to be fond of you. For the sake\
      of that....\'94 She met the heavy-lidded gaze of his brown eyes with\
      the downward stare of her green-grey eyes; touched his hand\
      suddenly, turned her back, and went into her room.\
\
      She sat there a long time before her glass, fingering her rings,\
      thinking of this subdued dark man, almost a stranger to her, on\
      the bed in the other room; resolutely not \'93worrying,\'94 but gnawed\
      by jealousy of what he had been through, and now and again just\
      visited by pity.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER XIV OUTLANDISH NIGHT\
\
\
      Soames doggedly let the spring come\'97no easy task for one\
      conscious that time was flying, his birds in the bush no nearer\
      the hand, no issue from the web anywhere visible. Mr. Polteed\
      reported nothing, except that his watch went on\'97costing a lot of\
      money. Val and his cousin were gone to the war, whence came news\
      more favourable; Dartie was behaving himself so far; James had\
      retained his health; business prospered almost terribly\'97there was\
      nothing to worry Soames except that he was \'93held up,\'94 could make\
      no step in any direction.\
\
      He did not exactly avoid Soho, for he could not afford to let\
      them think that he had \'93piped off,\'94 as James would have put it\'97he\
      might want to \'93pipe on\'94 again at any minute. But he had to be so\
      restrained and cautious that he would often pass the door of the\
      Restaurant Bretagne without going in, and wander out of the\
      purlieus of that region which always gave him the feeling of\
      having been possessively irregular.\
\
      He wandered thus one May night into Regent Street and the most\
      amazing crowd he had ever seen; a shrieking, whistling, dancing,\
      jostling, grotesque and formidably jovial crowd, with false noses\
      and mouth-organs, penny whistles and long feathers, every\
      appanage of idiocy, as it seemed to him. Mafeking! Of course, it\
      had been relieved! Good! But was that an excuse? Who were these\
      people, what were they, where had they come from into the West\
      End? His face was tickled, his ears whistled into. Girls cried:\
      \'93Keep your hair on, stucco!\'94 A youth so knocked off his top-hat\
      that he recovered it with difficulty. Crackers were exploding\
      beneath his nose, between his feet. He was bewildered,\
      exasperated, offended. This stream of people came from every\
      quarter, as if impulse had unlocked flood-gates, let flow waters\
      of whose existence he had heard, perhaps, but believed in never.\
      This, then, was the populace, the innumerable living negation of\
      gentility and Forsyteism. This was\'97egad!\'97Democracy! It stank,\
      yelled, was hideous! In the East End, or even Soho, perhaps\'97but\
      here in Regent Street, in Piccadilly! What were the police about!\
      In 1900, Soames, with his Forsyte thousands, had never seen the\
      cauldron with the lid off; and now looking into it, could hardly\
      believe his scorching eyes. The whole thing was unspeakable!\
      These people had no restraint, they seemed to think him funny;\
      such swarms of them, rude, coarse, laughing\'97and what laughter!\
\
      Nothing sacred to them! He shouldn\'92t be surprised if they began\
      to break windows. In Pall Mall, past those august dwellings, to\
      enter which people paid sixty pounds, this shrieking, whistling,\
      dancing dervish of a crowd was swarming. From the Club windows\
      his own kind were looking out on them with regulated amusement.\
      They didn\'92t realise! Why, this was serious\'97might come to\
      anything! The crowd was cheerful, but some day they would come in\
      different mood! He remembered there had been a mob in the late\
      eighties, when he was at Brighton; they had smashed things and\
      made speeches. But more than dread, he felt a deep surprise. They\
      were hysterical\'97it wasn\'92t English! And all about the relief of a\
      little town as big as\'97Watford, six thousand miles away.\
      Restraint, reserve! Those qualities to him more dear almost than\
      life, those indispensable attributes of property and culture,\
      where were they? It wasn\'92t English! No, it wasn\'92t English! So\
      Soames brooded, threading his way on. It was as if he had\
      suddenly caught sight of someone cutting the covenant \'93for quiet\
      possession\'94 out of his legal documents; or of a monster lurking\
      and stalking out in the future, casting its shadow before. Their\
      want of stolidity, their want of reverence! It was like\
      discovering that nine-tenths of the people of England were\
      foreigners. And if that were so\'97then, anything might happen!\
\
      At Hyde Park Corner he ran into George Forsyte, very sunburnt\
      from racing, holding a false nose in his hand.\
\
      \'93Hallo, Soames!\'94 he said, \'93have a nose!\'94\
\
      Soames responded with a pale smile.\
\
      \'93Got this from one of these sportsmen,\'94 went on George, who had\
      evidently been dining; \'93had to lay him out\'97for trying to bash my\
      hat. I say, one of these days we shall have to fight these chaps,\
      they\'92re getting so damned cheeky\'97all radicals and socialists.\
      They want our goods. You tell Uncle James that, it\'92ll make him\
      sleep.\'94\
\
      \'93_In vino veritas_,\'94 thought Soames, but he only nodded, and\
      passed on up Hamilton Place. There was but a trickle of\
      roysterers in Park Lane, not very noisy. And looking up at the\
      houses he thought: \'93After all, we\'92re the backbone of the country.\
      They won\'92t upset us easily. Possession\'92s nine points of the law.\'94\
\
      But, as he closed the door of his father\'92s house behind him, all\
      that queer outlandish nightmare in the streets passed out of his\
      mind almost as completely as if, having dreamed it, he had\
      awakened in the warm clean morning comfort of his\
      spring-mattressed bed.\
\
      Walking into the centre of the great empty drawing-room, he stood\
      still.\
\
      A wife! Somebody to talk things over with. One had a right! Damn\
      it! One had a right!\
\
\
\
\
      PART III\
\
      CHAPTER I SOAMES IN PARIS\
\
\
      Soames had travelled little. Aged nineteen he had made the \'93petty\
      tour\'94 with his father, mother, and Winifred\'97Brussels, the Rhine,\
      Switzerland, and home by way of Paris. Aged twenty-seven, just\
      when he began to take interest in pictures, he had spent five hot\
      weeks in Italy, looking into the Renaissance\'97not so much in it as\
      he had been led to expect\'97and a fortnight in Paris on his way\
      back, looking into himself, as became a Forsyte surrounded by\
      people so strongly self-centred and \'93foreign\'94 as the French. His\
      knowledge of their language being derived from his public school,\
      he did not understand them when they spoke. Silence he had found\
      better for all parties; one did not make a fool of oneself. He\
      had disliked the look of the men\'92s clothes, the closed-in cabs,\
      the theatres which looked like bee-hives, the Galleries which\
      smelled of beeswax. He was too cautious and too shy to explore\
      that side of Paris supposed by Forsytes to constitute its\
      attraction under the rose; and as for a collector\'92s bargain\'97not\
      one to be had! As Nicholas might have put it\'97they were a grasping\
      lot. He had come back uneasy, saying Paris was overrated.\
\
      When, therefore, in June of 1900 he went to Paris, it was but his\
      third attempt on the centre of civilisation. This time, however,\
      the mountain was going to Mahomet; for he felt by now more deeply\
      civilised than Paris, and perhaps he really was. Moreover, he had\
      a definite objective. This was no mere genuflexion to a shrine of\
      taste and immorality, but the prosecution of his own legitimate\
      affairs. He went, indeed, because things were getting past a\
      joke. The watch went on and on, and\'97nothing\'97nothing! Jolyon had\
      never returned to Paris, and no one else was \'93suspect!\'94 Busy with\
      new and very confidential matters, Soames was realising more than\
      ever how essential reputation is to a solicitor. But at night and\
      in his leisure moments he was ravaged by the thought that time\
      was always flying and money flowing in, and his own future as\
      much \'93in irons\'94 as ever. Since Mafeking night he had become aware\
      that a \'93young fool of a doctor\'94 was hanging round Annette. Twice\
      he had come across him\'97a cheerful young fool, not more than\
      thirty.\
\
      Nothing annoyed Soames so much as cheerfulness\'97an indecent,\
      extravagant sort of quality, which had no relation to facts. The\
      mixture of his desires and hopes was, in a word, becoming\
      torture; and lately the thought had come to him that perhaps\
      Irene knew she was being shadowed: It was this which finally\
      decided him to go and see for himself; to go and once more try to\
      break down her repugnance, her refusal to make her own and his\
      path comparatively smooth once more. If he failed again\'97well, he\
      would see what she did with herself, anyway!\
\
      He went to an hotel in the Rue Caumartin, highly recommended to\
      Forsytes, where practically nobody spoke French. He had formed no\
      plan. He did not want to startle her; yet must contrive that she\
      had no chance to evade him by flight. And next morning he set out\
      in bright weather.\
\
      Paris had an air of gaiety, a sparkle over its star-shape which\
      almost annoyed Soames. He stepped gravely, his nose lifted a\
      little sideways in real curiosity. He desired now to understand\
      things French. Was not Annette French? There was much to be got\
      out of his visit, if he could only get it. In this laudable mood\
      and the Place de la Concorde he was nearly run down three times.\
      He came on the \'93Cours la Reine,\'94 where Irene\'92s hotel was\
      situated, almost too suddenly, for he had not yet fixed on his\
      procedure. Crossing over to the river side, he noted the\
      building, white and cheerful-looking, with green sunblinds, seen\
      through a screen of plane-tree leaves. And, conscious that it\
      would be far better to meet her casually in some open place than\
      to risk a call, he sat down on a bench whence he could watch the\
      entrance. It was not quite eleven o\'92clock, and improbable that\
      she had yet gone out. Some pigeons were strutting and preening\
      their feathers in the pools of sunlight between the shadows of\
      the plane-trees. A workman in a blue blouse passed, and threw\
      them crumbs from the paper which contained his dinner. A\
      \'93_bonne_\'94 coiffed with ribbon shepherded two little girls with\
      pig-tails and frilled drawers. A cab meandered by, whose _cocher_\
      wore a blue coat and a black-glazed hat. To Soames a kind of\
      affectation seemed to cling about it all, a sort of\
      picturesqueness which was out of date. A theatrical people, the\
      French! He lit one of his rare cigarettes, with a sense of injury\
      that Fate should be casting his life into outlandish waters. He\
      shouldn\'92t wonder if Irene quite enjoyed this foreign life; she\
      had never been properly English\'97even to look at! And he began\
      considering which of those windows could be hers under the green\
      sunblinds. How could he word what he had come to say so that it\
      might pierce the defence of her proud obstinacy? He threw the\
      fag-end of his cigarette at a pigeon, with the thought: \'93I can\'92t\
      stay here for ever twiddling my thumbs. Better give it up and\
      call on her in the late afternoon.\'94 But he still sat on, heard\
      twelve strike, and then half-past. \'93I\'92ll wait till one,\'94 he\
      thought, \'93while I\'92m about it.\'94 But just then he started up, and\
      shrinkingly sat down again. A woman had come out in a\
      cream-coloured frock, and was moving away under a fawn-coloured\
      parasol. Irene herself! He waited till she was too far away to\
      recognise him, then set out after her. She was strolling as\
      though she had no particular objective; moving, if he remembered\
      rightly, toward the Bois de Boulogne. For half an hour at least\
      he kept his distance on the far side of the way till she had\
      passed into the Bois itself. Was she going to meet someone after\
      all? Some confounded Frenchman\'97one of those \'93Bel Ami\'94 chaps,\
      perhaps, who had nothing to do but hang about women\'97for he had\
      read that book with difficulty and a sort of disgusted\
      fascination. He followed doggedly along a shady alley, losing\
      sight of her now and then when the path curved. And it came back\
      to him how, long ago, one night in Hyde Park he had slid and\
      sneaked from tree to tree, from seat to seat, hunting blindly,\
      ridiculously, in burning jealousy for her and young Bosinney. The\
      path bent sharply, and, hurrying, he came on her sitting in front\
      of a small fountain\'97a little green-bronze Niobe veiled in hair to\
      her slender hips, gazing at the pool she had wept: He came on her\
      so suddenly that he was past before he could turn and take off\
      his hat. She did not start up. She had always had great\
      self-command\'97it was one of the things he most admired in her, one\
      of his greatest grievances against her, because he had never been\
      able to tell what she was thinking. Had she realised that he was\
      following? Her self-possession made him angry; and, disdaining to\
      explain his presence, he pointed to the mournful little Niobe,\
      and said:\
\
      \'93That\'92s rather a good thing.\'94\
\
      He could see, then, that she was struggling to preserve her\
      composure.\
\
      \'93I didn\'92t want to startle you; is this one of your haunts?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      \'93A little lonely.\'94 As he spoke, a lady, strolling by, paused to\
      look at the fountain and passed on.\
\
      Irene\'92s eyes followed her.\
\
      \'93No,\'94 she said, prodding the ground with her parasol, \'93never\
      lonely. One has always one\'92s shadow.\'94\
\
      Soames understood; and, looking at her hard, he exclaimed:\
\
      \'93Well, it\'92s your own fault. You can be free of it at any moment.\
      Irene, come back to me, and be free.\'94\
\
      Irene laughed.\
\
      \'93Don\'92t!\'94 cried Soames, stamping his foot; \'93it\'92s inhuman. Listen!\
      Is there any condition I can make which will bring you back to\
      me? If I promise you a separate house\'97and just a visit now and\
      then?\'94\
\
      Irene rose, something wild suddenly in her face and figure.\
\
      \'93None! None! None! You may hunt me to the grave. I will not\
      come.\'94\
\
      Outraged and on edge, Soames recoiled.\
\
      \'93Don\'92t make a scene!\'94 he said sharply. And they both stood\
      motionless, staring at the little Niobe, whose greenish flesh the\
      sunlight was burnishing.\
\
      \'93That\'92s your last word, then,\'94 muttered Soames, clenching his\
      hands; \'93you condemn us both.\'94\
\
      Irene bent her head. \'93I can\'92t come back. Good-bye!\'94\
\
      A feeling of monstrous injustice flared up in Soames.\
\
      \'93Stop!\'94 he said, \'93and listen to me a moment. You gave me a sacred\
      vow\'97you came to me without a penny. You had all I could give you.\
      You broke that vow without cause, you made me a by-word; you\
      refused me a child; you\'92ve left me in prison; you\'97you still move\
      me so that I want you\'97I want you. Well, what do you think of\
      yourself?\'94\
\
      Irene turned, her face was deadly pale, her eyes burning dark.\
\
      \'93God made me as I am,\'94 she said; \'93wicked if you like\'97but not so\
      wicked that I\'92ll give myself again to a man I hate.\'94\
\
      The sunlight gleamed on her hair as she moved away, and seemed to\
      lay a caress all down her clinging cream-coloured frock.\
\
      Soames could neither speak nor move. That word \'93hate\'94\'97so extreme,\
      so primitive\'97made all the Forsyte in him tremble. With a deep\
      imprecation he strode away from where she had vanished, and ran\
      almost into the arms of the lady sauntering back\'97the fool, the\
      shadowing fool!\
\
      He was soon dripping with perspiration, in the depths of the\
      Bois.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he thought, \'93I need have no consideration for her now;\
      she has not a grain of it for me. I\'92ll show her this very day\
      that she\'92s my wife still.\'94\
\
      But on the way home to his hotel, he was forced to the conclusion\
      that he did not know what he meant. One could not make scenes in\
      public, and short of scenes in public what was there he could do?\
      He almost cursed his own thin-skinnedness. She might deserve no\
      consideration; but he\'97alas! deserved some at his own hands. And\
      sitting lunchless in the hall of his hotel, with tourists passing\
      every moment, Baedeker in hand, he was visited by black\
      dejection. In irons! His whole life, with every natural instinct\
      and every decent yearning gagged and fettered, and all because\
      Fate had driven him seventeen years ago to set his heart upon\
      this woman\'97so utterly, that even now he had no real heart to set\
      on any other! Cursed was the day he had met her, and his eyes for\
      seeing in her anything but the cruel Venus she was! And yet,\
      still seeing her with the sunlight on the clinging China crepe of\
      her gown, he uttered a little groan, so that a tourist who was\
      passing, thought: \'93Man in pain! Let\'92s see! what did I have for\
      lunch?\'94\
\
      Later, in front of a caf\'e9 near the Opera, over a glass of cold\
      tea with lemon and a straw in it, he took the malicious\
      resolution to go and dine at her hotel. If she were there, he\
      would speak to her; if she were not, he would leave a note. He\
      dressed carefully, and wrote as follows:\
\
      \'93Your idyll with that fellow Jolyon Forsyte is known to me at all\
      events. If you pursue it, understand that I will leave no stone\
      unturned to make things unbearable for him.\
\
      \'91S. F.\'92\'94\
\
      He sealed this note but did not address it, refusing to write the\
      maiden name which she had impudently resumed, or to put the word\
      Forsyte on the envelope lest she should tear it up unread. Then\
      he went out, and made his way through the glowing streets,\
      abandoned to evening pleasure-seekers. Entering her hotel, he\
      took his seat in a far corner of the dining-room whence he could\
      see all entrances and exits. She was not there. He ate little,\
      quickly, watchfully. She did not come. He lingered in the lounge\
      over his coffee, drank two liqueurs of brandy. But still she did\
      not come. He went over to the keyboard and examined the names.\
      Number twelve, on the first floor! And he determined to take the\
      note up himself. He mounted red-carpeted stairs, past a little\
      salon; eight-ten-twelve! Should he knock, push the note under,\
      or...? He looked furtively round and turned the handle. The door\
      opened, but into a little space leading to another door; he\
      knocked on that\'97no answer. The door was locked. It fitted very\
      closely to the floor; the note would not go under. He thrust it\
      back into his pocket, and stood a moment listening. He felt\
      somehow certain that she was not there. And suddenly he came\
      away, passing the little salon down the stairs. He stopped at the\
      bureau and said:\
\
      \'93Will you kindly see that Mrs. Heron has this note?\'94\
\
      \'93Madame Heron left to-day, Monsieur\'97suddenly, about three\
      o\'92clock. There was illness in her family.\'94\
\
      Soames compressed his lips. \'93Oh!\'94 he said; \'93do you know her\
      address?\'94\
\
      \'93_Non, Monsieur_. England, I think.\'94\
\
      Soames put the note back into his pocket and went out. He hailed\
      an open horse-cab which was passing.\
\
      \'93Drive me anywhere!\'94\
\
      The man, who, obviously, did not understand, smiled, and waved\
      his whip. And Soames was borne along in that little\
      yellow-wheeled Victoria all over star-shaped Paris, with here and\
      there a pause, and the question, \'93_C\'92est par ici, Monsieur?_\'94\
      \'93No, go on,\'94 till the man gave it up in despair, and the\
      yellow-wheeled chariot continued to roll between the tall,\
      flat-fronted shuttered houses and plane-tree avenues\'97a little\
      Flying Dutchman of a cab.\
\
      \'93Like my life,\'94 thought Soames, \'93without object, on and on!\'94\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER II IN THE WEB\
\
\
      Soames returned to England the following day, and on the third\
      morning received a visit from Mr. Polteed, who wore a flower and\
      carried a brown billycock hat. Soames motioned him to a seat.\
\
      \'93The news from the war is not so bad, is it?\'94 said Mr. Polteed.\
      \'93I hope I see you well, sir.\'94\
\
      \'93Thanks! quite.\'94\
\
      Mr. Polteed leaned forward, smiled, opened his hand, looked into\
      it, and said softly:\
\
      \'93I think we\'92ve done your business for you at last.\'94\
\
      \'93What?\'94 ejaculated Soames.\
\
      \'93Nineteen reports quite suddenly what I think we shall be\
      justified in calling conclusive evidence,\'94 and Mr. Polteed\
      paused.\
\
      \'93Well?\'94\
\
      \'93On the 10th instant, after witnessing an interview between 17\
      and a party, earlier in the day, 19 can swear to having seen him\
      coming out of her bedroom in the hotel about ten o\'92clock in the\
      evening. With a little care in the giving of the evidence that\
      will be enough, especially as 17 has left Paris\'97no doubt with the\
      party in question. In fact, they both slipped off, and we haven\'92t\
      got on to them again, yet; but we shall\'97we shall. She\'92s worked\
      hard under very difficult circumstances, and I\'92m glad she\'92s\
      brought it off at last.\'94 Mr. Polteed took out a cigarette, tapped\
      its end against the table, looked at Soames, and put it back. The\
      expression on his client\'92s face was not encouraging.\
\
      \'93Who is this new person?\'94 said Soames abruptly.\
\
      \'93That we don\'92t know. She\'92ll swear to the fact, and she\'92s got his\
      appearance pat.\'94\
\
      Mr. Polteed took out a letter, and began reading:\
\
      \'93\'91Middle-aged, medium height, blue dittoes in afternoon, evening\
      dress at night, pale, dark hair, small dark moustache, flat\
      cheeks, good chin, grey eyes, small feet, guilty look....\'92\'94\
\
      Soames rose and went to the window. He stood there in sardonic\
      fury. Congenital idiot\'97spidery congenital idiot! Seven months at\
      fifteen pounds a week\'97to be tracked down as his own wife\'92s lover!\
      Guilty look! He threw the window open.\
\
      \'93It\'92s hot,\'94 he said, and came back to his seat.\
\
      Crossing his knees, he bent a supercilious glance on Mr. Polteed.\
\
      \'93I doubt if that\'92s quite good enough,\'94 he said, drawling the\
      words, \'93with no name or address. I think you may let that lady\
      have a rest, and take up our friend 47 at this end.\'94 Whether\
      Polteed had spotted him he could not tell; but he had a mental\
      vision of him in the midst of his cronies dissolved in\
      inextinguishable laughter. \'93Guilty look!\'94 Damnation!\
\
      Mr. Polteed said in a tone of urgency, almost of pathos: \'93I\
      assure you we have put it through sometimes on less than that.\
      It\'92s Paris, you know. Attractive woman living alone. Why not risk\
      it, sir? We might screw it up a peg.\'94\
\
      Soames had sudden insight. The fellow\'92s professional zeal was\
      stirred: \'93Greatest triumph of my career; got a man his divorce\
      through a visit to his own wife\'92s bedroom! Something to talk of\
      there, when I retire!\'94 And for one wild moment he thought: \'93Why\
      not?\'94 After all, hundreds of men of medium height had small feet\
      and a guilty look!\
\
      \'93I\'92m not authorised to take any risk!\'94 he said shortly.\
\
      Mr. Polteed looked up.\
\
      \'93Pity,\'94 he said, \'93quite a pity! That other affair seemed very\
      costive.\'94\
\
      Soames rose.\
\
      \'93Never mind that. Please watch 47, and take care not to find a\
      mare\'92s nest. Good-morning!\'94\
\
      Mr. Polteed\'92s eye glinted at the words \'93mare\'92s nest!\'94\
\
      \'93Very good. You shall be kept informed.\'94\
\
      And Soames was alone again. The spidery, dirty, ridiculous\
      business! Laying his arms on the table, he leaned his forehead on\
      them. Full ten minutes he rested thus, till a managing clerk\
      roused him with the draft prospectus of a new issue of shares,\
      very desirable, in Manifold and Topping\'92s. That afternoon he left\
      work early and made his way to the Restaurant Bretagne. Only\
      Madame Lamotte was in. Would _Monsieur_ have tea with her?\
\
      Soames bowed.\
\
      When they were seated at right angles to each other in the little\
      room, he said abruptly:\
\
      \'93I want a talk with you, _Madame_.\'94\
\
      The quick lift of her clear brown eyes told him that she had long\
      expected such words.\
\
      \'93I have to ask you something first: That young doctor\'97what\'92s his\
      name? Is there anything between him and Annette?\'94\
\
      Her whole personality had become, as it were, like jet\'97clear-cut,\
      black, hard, shining.\
\
      \'93Annette is young,\'94 she said; \'93so is _monsieur le docteur_.\
      Between young people things move quickly; but Annette is a good\
      daughter. Ah! what a jewel of a nature!\'94\
\
      The least little smile twisted Soames\'92 lips.\
\
      \'93Nothing definite, then?\'94\
\
      \'93But definite\'97no, indeed! The young man is veree nice, but\'97what\
      would you? There is no money at present.\'94\
\
      She raised her willow-patterned tea-cup; Soames did the same.\
      Their eyes met.\
\
      \'93I am a married man,\'94 he said, \'93living apart from my wife for\
      many years. I am seeking to divorce her.\'94\
\
      Madame Lamotte put down her cup. Indeed! What tragic things there\
      were! The entire absence of sentiment in her inspired a queer\
      species of contempt in Soames.\
\
      \'93I am a rich man,\'94 he added, fully conscious that the remark was\
      not in good taste. \'93It is useless to say more at present, but I\
      think you understand.\'94\
\
      Madame\'92s eyes, so open that the whites showed above them, looked\
      at him very straight.\
\
      \'93_Ah! \'e7a\'97mais nous avons le temps!_\'94 was all she said. \'93Another\
      little cup?\'94 Soames refused, and, taking his leave, walked\
      westward.\
\
      He had got that off his mind; she would not let Annette commit\
      herself with that cheerful young ass until...! But what chance of\
      his ever being able to say: \'93I\'92m free?\'94 What chance? The future\
      had lost all semblance of reality. He felt like a fly, entangled\
      in cobweb filaments, watching the desirable freedom of the air\
      with pitiful eyes.\
\
      He was short of exercise, and wandered on to Kensington Gardens,\
      and down Queen\'92s Gate towards Chelsea. Perhaps she had gone back\
      to her flat. That at all events he could find out. For since that\
      last and most ignominious repulse his wounded self-respect had\
      taken refuge again in the feeling that she must have a lover. He\
      arrived before the little Mansions at the dinner-hour. No need to\
      enquire! A grey-haired lady was watering the flower-boxes in her\
      window. It was evidently let. And he walked slowly past again,\
      along the river\'97an evening of clear, quiet beauty, all harmony\
      and comfort, except within his heart.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER III RICHMOND PARK\
\
\
      On the afternoon that Soames crossed to France a cablegram was\
      received by Jolyon at Robin Hill:\
\
      \'93Your son down with enteric no immediate danger will cable\
      again.\'94\
\
      It reached a household already agitated by the imminent departure\
      of June, whose berth was booked for the following day. She was,\
      indeed, in the act of confiding Eric Cobbley and his family to\
      her father\'92s care when the message arrived.\
\
      The resolution to become a Red Cross nurse, taken under stimulus\
      of Jolly\'92s enlistment, had been loyally fulfilled with the\
      irritation and regret which all Forsytes feel at what curtails\
      their individual liberties. Enthusiastic at first about the\
      \'93wonderfulness\'94 of the work, she had begun after a month to feel\
      that she could train herself so much better than others could\
      train her. And if Holly had not insisted on following her\
      example, and being trained too, she must inevitably have \'93cried\
      off.\'94 The departure of Jolly and Val with their troop in April\
      had further stiffened her failing resolve. But now, on the point\
      of departure, the thought of leaving Eric Cobbley, with a wife\
      and two children, adrift in the cold waters of an unappreciative\
      world weighed on her so that she was still in danger of backing\
      out. The reading of that cablegram, with its disquieting reality,\
      clinched the matter. She saw herself already nursing Jolly\'97for of\
      course they would let her nurse her own brother! Jolyon\'97ever wide\
      and doubtful\'97had no such hope. Poor June!\
\
      Could any Forsyte of her generation grasp how rude and brutal\
      life was? Ever since he knew of his boy\'92s arrival at Cape Town\
      the thought of him had been a kind of recurrent sickness in\
      Jolyon. He could not get reconciled to the feeling that Jolly was\
      in danger all the time. The cablegram, grave though it was, was\
      almost a relief. He was now safe from bullets, anyway. And\
      yet\'97this enteric was a virulent disease! _The Times_ was full of\
      deaths therefrom. Why could _he_ not be lying out there in that\
      up-country hospital, and his boy safe at home? The un-Forsytean\
      self-sacrifice of his three children, indeed, had quite\
      bewildered Jolyon. He would eagerly change places with Jolly,\
      because he loved his boy; but no such personal motive was\
      influencing _them_. He could only think that it marked the\
      decline of the Forsyte type.\
\
      Late that afternoon Holly came out to him under the old oak-tree.\
      She had grown up very much during these last months of hospital\
      training away from home. And, seeing her approach, he thought:\
      \'93She has more sense than June, child though she is; more wisdom.\
      Thank God _she_ isn\'92t going out.\'94 She had seated herself in the\
      swing, very silent and still. \'93She feels this,\'94 thought Jolyon,\
      \'93as much as I\'94 and, seeing her eyes fixed on him, he said: \'93Don\'92t\
      take it to heart too much, my child. If he weren\'92t ill, he might\
      be in much greater danger.\'94\
\
      Holly got out of the swing.\
\
      \'93I want to tell you something, Dad. It was through me that Jolly\
      enlisted and went out.\'94\
\
      \'93How\'92s that?\'94\
\
      \'93When you were away in Paris, Val Dartie and I fell in love. We\
      used to ride in Richmond Park; we got engaged. Jolly found it\
      out, and thought he ought to stop it; so he dared Val to enlist.\
      It was all my fault, Dad; and I want to go out too. Because if\
      anything happens to either of them I should feel awful. Besides,\
      I\'92m just as much trained as June.\'94\
\
      Jolyon gazed at her in a stupefaction that was tinged with irony.\
      So this was the answer to the riddle he had been asking himself;\
      and his three children were Forsytes after all. Surely Holly\
      might have told him all this before! But he smothered the\
      sarcastic sayings on his lips. Tenderness to the young was\
      perhaps the most sacred article of his belief. He had got, no\
      doubt, what he deserved. Engaged! So this was why he had so lost\
      touch with her! And to young Val Dartie\'97nephew of Soames\'97in the\
      other camp! It was all terribly distasteful. He closed his easel,\
      and set his drawing against the tree.\
\
      \'93Have you told June?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes; she says she\'92ll get me into her cabin somehow. It\'92s a\
      single cabin; but one of us could sleep on the floor. If you\
      consent, she\'92ll go up now and get permission.\'94\
\
      \'93Consent?\'94 thought Jolyon. \'93Rather late in the day to ask for\
      that!\'94 But again he checked himself.\
\
      \'93You\'92re too young, my dear; they won\'92t let you.\'94\
\
      \'93June knows some people that she helped to go to Cape Town. If\
      they won\'92t let me nurse yet, I could stay with them and go on\
      training there. Let me go, Dad!\'94\
\
      Jolyon smiled because he could have cried.\
\
      \'93I never stop anyone from doing anything,\'94 he said.\
\
      Holly flung her arms round his neck.\
\
      \'93Oh! Dad, you are the best in the world.\'94\
\
      \'93That means the worst,\'94 thought Jolyon. If he had ever doubted\
      his creed of tolerance he did so then.\
\
      \'93I\'92m not friendly with Val\'92s family,\'94 he said, \'93and I don\'92t know\
      Val, but Jolly didn\'92t like him.\'94\
\
      Holly looked at the distance and said:\
\
      \'93I love him.\'94\
\
      \'93That settles it,\'94 said Jolyon dryly, then catching the\
      expression on her face, he kissed her, with the thought: \'93Is\
      anything more pathetic than the faith of the young?\'94 Unless he\
      actually forbade her going it was obvious that he must make the\
      best of it, so he went up to town with June. Whether due to her\
      persistence, or the fact that the official they saw was an old\
      school friend of Jolyon\'92s, they obtained permission for Holly to\
      share the single cabin. He took them to Surbiton station the\
      following evening, and they duly slid away from him, provided\
      with money, invalid foods, and those letters of credit without\
      which Forsytes do not travel.\
\
      He drove back to Robin Hill under a brilliant sky to his late\
      dinner, served with an added care by servants trying to show him\
      that they sympathised, eaten with an added scrupulousness to show\
      them that he appreciated their sympathy. But it was a real relief\
      to get to his cigar on the terrace of flag-stones\'97cunningly\
      chosen by young Bosinney for shape and colour\'97with night closing\
      in around him, so beautiful a night, hardly whispering in the\
      trees, and smelling so sweet that it made him ache. The grass was\
      drenched with dew, and he kept to those flagstones, up and down,\
      till presently it began to seem to him that he was one of three,\
      not wheeling, but turning right about at each end, so that his\
      father was always nearest to the house, and his son always\
      nearest to the terrace edge. Each had an arm lightly within his\
      arm; he dared not lift his hand to his cigar lest he should\
      disturb them, and it burned away, dripping ash on him, till it\
      dropped from his lips, at last, which were getting hot. They left\
      him then, and his arms felt chilly. Three Jolyons in one Jolyon\
      they had walked.\
\
      He stood still, counting the sounds\'97a carriage passing on the\
      highroad, a distant train, the dog at Gage\'92s farm, the whispering\
      trees, the groom playing on his penny whistle. A multitude of\
      stars up there\'97bright and silent, so far off! No moon as yet!\
      Just enough light to show him the dark flags and swords of the\
      iris flowers along the terrace edge\'97his favourite flower that had\
      the night\'92s own colour on its curving crumpled petals. He turned\
      round to the house. Big, unlighted, not a soul beside himself to\
      live in all that part of it. Stark loneliness! He could not go on\
      living here alone. And yet, so long as there was beauty, why\
      should a man feel lonely? The answer\'97as to some idiot\'92s\
      riddle\'97was: Because he did. The greater the beauty, the greater\
      the loneliness, for at the back of beauty was harmony, and at the\
      back of harmony was\'97union. Beauty could not comfort if the soul\
      were out of it. The night, maddeningly lovely, with bloom of\
      grapes on it in starshine, and the breath of grass and honey\
      coming from it, he could not enjoy, while she who was to him the\
      life of beauty, its embodiment and essence, was cut off from him,\
      utterly cut off now, he felt, by honourable decency.\
\
      He made a poor fist of sleeping, striving too hard after that\
      resignation which Forsytes find difficult to reach, bred to their\
      own way and left so comfortably off by their fathers. But after\
      dawn he dozed off, and soon was dreaming a strange dream.\
\
      He was on a stage with immensely high rich curtains\'97high as the\
      very stars\'97stretching in a semi-circle from footlights to\
      footlights. He himself was very small, a little black restless\
      figure roaming up and down; and the odd thing was that he was not\
      altogether himself, but Soames as well, so that he was not only\
      experiencing but watching. This figure of himself and Soames was\
      trying to find a way out through the curtains, which, heavy and\
      dark, kept him in. Several times he had crossed in front of them\
      before he saw with delight a sudden narrow rift\'97a tall chink of\
      beauty the colour of iris flowers, like a glimpse of Paradise,\
      remote, ineffable. Stepping quickly forward to pass into it, he\
      found the curtains closing before him. Bitterly disappointed\
      he\'97or was it Soames?\'97moved on, and there was the chink again\
      through the parted curtains, which again closed too soon. This\
      went on and on and he never got through till he woke with the\
      word \'93Irene\'94 on his lips. The dream disturbed him badly,\
      especially that identification of himself with Soames.\
\
      Next morning, finding it impossible to work, he spent hours\
      riding Jolly\'92s horse in search of fatigue. And on the second day\
      he made up his mind to move to London and see if he could not get\
      permission to follow his daughters to South Africa. He had just\
      begun to pack the following morning when he received this letter:\
\
      \'93GREEN HOTEL,\
      \'93RICHMOND.\
      \'93_June_ 13.\
\
       \'93MY DEAR JOLYON,\
          \'93You will be surprised to see how near I am to you. Paris\
          became impossible\'97and I have come here to be within reach of\
          your advice. I would so love to see you again. Since you left\
          Paris I don\'92t think I have met anyone I could really talk to.\
          Is all well with you and with your boy? No one knows, I\
          think, that I am here at present.\
\
      \'93Always your friend,\
      \'93IRENE.\'94\
\
      Irene within three miles of him!\'97and again in flight! He stood\
      with a very queer smile on his lips. This was more than he had\
      bargained for!\
\
      About noon he set out on foot across Richmond Park, and as he\
      went along, he thought: \'93Richmond Park! By Jove, it suits us\
      Forsytes!\'94 Not that Forsytes lived there\'97nobody lived there save\
      royalty, rangers, and the deer\'97but in Richmond Park Nature was\
      allowed to go so far and no further, putting up a brave show of\
      being natural, seeming to say: \'93Look at my instincts\'97they are\
      almost passions, very nearly out of hand, but not quite, of\
      course; the very hub of possession is to possess oneself.\'94 Yes!\
      Richmond Park possessed itself, even on that bright day of June,\
      with arrowy cuckoos shifting the tree-points of their calls, and\
      the wood doves announcing high summer.\
\
      The Green Hotel, which Jolyon entered at one o\'92clock, stood\
      nearly opposite that more famous hostelry, the Crown and Sceptre;\
      it was modest, highly respectable, never out of cold beef,\
      gooseberry tart, and a dowager or two, so that a carriage and\
      pair was almost always standing before the door.\
\
      In a room draped in chintz so slippery as to forbid all emotion,\
      Irene was sitting on a piano stool covered with crewel work,\
      playing \'93Hansel and Gretel\'94 out of an old score. Above her on a\
      wall, not yet Morris-papered, was a print of the Queen on a pony,\
      amongst deer-hounds, Scotch caps, and slain stags; beside her in\
      a pot on the window-sill was a white and rosy fuchsia. The\
      Victorianism of the room almost talked; and in her clinging frock\
      Irene seemed to Jolyon like Venus emerging from the shell of the\
      past century.\
\
      \'93If the proprietor had eyes,\'94 he said, \'93he would show you the\
      door; you have broken through his decorations.\'94 Thus lightly he\
      smothered up an emotional moment. Having eaten cold beef, pickled\
      walnut, gooseberry tart, and drunk stone-bottle ginger-beer, they\
      walked into the Park, and light talk was succeeded by the silence\
      Jolyon had dreaded.\
\
      \'93You haven\'92t told me about Paris,\'94 he said at last.\
\
      \'93No. I\'92ve been shadowed for a long time; one gets used to that.\
      But then Soames came. By the little Niobe\'97the same story; would I\
      go back to him?\'94\
\
      \'93Incredible!\'94\
\
      She had spoken without raising her eyes, but she looked up now.\
      Those dark eyes clinging to his said as no words could have: \'93I\
      have come to an end; if you want me, here I am.\'94\
\
      For sheer emotional intensity had he ever\'97old as he was\'97passed\
      through such a moment?\
\
      The words: \'93Irene, I adore you!\'94 almost escaped him. Then, with a\
      clearness of which he would not have believed mental vision\
      capable, he saw Jolly lying with a white face turned to a white\
      wall.\
\
      \'93My boy is very ill out there,\'94 he said quietly.\
\
      Irene slipped her arm through his.\
\
      \'93Let\'92s walk on; I understand.\'94\
\
      No miserable explanation to attempt! She had understood! And they\
      walked on among the bracken, knee-high already, between the\
      rabbit-holes and the oak-trees, talking of Jolly. He left her two\
      hours later at the Richmond Hill Gate, and turned towards home.\
\
      \'93She knows of my feeling for her, then,\'94 he thought. Of course!\
      One could not keep knowledge of that from such a woman!\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER IV OVER THE RIVER\
\
\
      Jolly was tired to death of dreams. They had left him now too wan\
      and weak to dream again; left him to lie torpid, faintly\
      remembering far-off things; just able to turn his eyes and gaze\
      through the window near his cot at the trickle of river running\
      by in the sands, at the straggling milk-bush of the Karoo beyond.\
      He knew what the Karoo was now, even if he had not seen a Boer\
      roll over like a rabbit, or heard the whine of flying bullets.\
      This pestilence had sneaked on him before he had smelled powder.\
      A thirsty day and a rash drink, or perhaps a tainted fruit\'97who\
      knew? Not he, who had not even strength left to grudge the evil\
      thing its victory\'97just enough to know that there were many lying\
      here with him, that he was sore with frenzied dreaming; just\
      enough to watch that thread of river and be able to remember\
      faintly those far-away things....\
\
      The sun was nearly down. It would be cooler soon. He would have\
      liked to know the time\'97to feel his old watch, so butter-smooth,\
      to hear the repeater strike. It would have been friendly,\
      home-like. He had not even strength to remember that the old\
      watch was last wound the day he began to lie here. The pulse of\
      his brain beat so feebly that faces which came and went, nurse\'92s,\
      doctor\'92s, orderly\'92s, were indistinguishable, just one indifferent\
      face; and the words spoken about him meant all the same thing,\
      and that almost nothing. Those things he used to do, though far\
      and faint, were more distinct\'97walking past the foot of the old\
      steps at Harrow \'93bill\'94\'97\'93Here, sir! Here, sir!\'94\'97wrapping boots in\
      the Westminster Gazette, greenish paper, shining\
      boots\'97grandfather coming from somewhere dark\'97a smell of earth\'97the\
      mushroom house! Robin Hill! Burying poor old Balthasar in the\
      leaves! Dad! Home....\
\
      Consciousness came again with noticing that the river had no\
      water in it\'97someone was speaking too. Want anything? No. What\
      could one want? Too weak to want\'97only to hear his watch\
      strike....\
\
      Holly! She wouldn\'92t bowl properly. Oh! Pitch them up! Not\
      sneaks!... \'93Back her, Two and Bow!\'94 He was Two!... Consciousness\
      came once more with a sense of the violet dusk outside, and a\
      rising blood-red crescent moon. His eyes rested on it fascinated;\
      in the long minutes of brain-nothingness it went moving up and\
      up....\
\
      \'93He\'92s going, doctor!\'94 Not pack boots again? Never? \'93Mind your\
      form, Two!\'94 Don\'92t cry! Go quietly\'97over the river\'97sleep!... Dark?\
      If somebody would\'97strike\'97his\'97watch!...\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER V SOAMES ACTS\
\
\
      A sealed letter in the handwriting of Mr. Polteed remained\
      unopened in Soames\'92 pocket throughout two hours of sustained\
      attention to the affairs of the \'93New Colliery Company,\'94 which,\
      declining almost from the moment of old Jolyon\'92s retirement from\
      the Chairmanship, had lately run down so fast that there was now\
      nothing for it but a \'93winding-up.\'94 He took the letter out to\
      lunch at his City Club, sacred to him for the meals he had eaten\
      there with his father in the early seventies, when James used to\
      like him to come and see for himself the nature of his future\
      life.\
\
      Here in a remote corner before a plate of roast mutton and mashed\
      potato, he read:\
\
      \'93DEAR SIR,\
          \'93In accordance with your suggestion we have duly taken the\
          matter up at the other end with gratifying results.\
          Observation of 47 has enabled us to locate 17 at the Green\
          Hotel, Richmond. The two have been observed to meet daily\
          during the past week in Richmond Park. Nothing absolutely\
          crucial has so far been notified. But in conjunction with\
          what we had from Paris at the beginning of the year, I am\
          confident we could now satisfy the Court. We shall, of\
          course, continue to watch the matter until we hear from you.\
\
      \'93Very faithfully yours,\
      \'93CLAUD POLTEED.\'94\
\
      Soames read it through twice and beckoned to the waiter:\
\
      \'93Take this away; it\'92s cold.\'94\
\
      \'93Shall I bring you some more, sir?\'94\
\
      \'93No. Get me some coffee in the other room.\'94\
\
      And, paying for what he had not eaten, he went out, passing two\
      acquaintances without sign of recognition.\
\
      \'93Satisfy the Court!\'94 he thought, sitting at a little round marble\
      table with the coffee before him. That fellow Jolyon! He poured\
      out his coffee, sweetened and drank it. He would disgrace him in\
      the eyes of his own children! And rising, with that resolution\
      hot within him, he found for the first time the inconvenience of\
      being his own solicitor. He could not treat this scandalous\
      matter in his own office. He must commit the soul of his private\
      dignity to a stranger, some other professional dealer in family\
      dishonour. Who was there he could go to? Linkman and Laver in\
      Budge Row, perhaps\'97reliable, not too conspicuous, only nodding\
      acquaintances. But before he saw them he must see Polteed again.\
      But at this thought Soames had a moment of sheer weakness. To\
      part with his secret? How find the words? How subject himself to\
      contempt and secret laughter? Yet, after all, the fellow knew\
      already\'97oh yes, he knew! And, feeling that he must finish with it\
      now, he took a cab into the West End.\
\
      In this hot weather the window of Mr. Polteed\'92s room was\
      positively open, and the only precaution was a wire gauze,\
      preventing the intrusion of flies. Two or three had tried to come\
      in, and been caught, so that they seemed to be clinging there\
      with the intention of being devoured presently. Mr. Polteed,\
      following the direction of his client\'92s eye, rose apologetically\
      and closed the window.\
\
      \'93Posing ass!\'94 thought Soames. Like all who fundamentally believe\
      in themselves he was rising to the occasion, and, with his little\
      sideway smile, he said: \'93I\'92ve had your letter. I\'92m going to act.\
      I suppose you know who the lady you\'92ve been watching really is?\'94\
      Mr. Polteed\'92s expression at that moment was a masterpiece. It so\
      clearly said: \'93Well, what do you think? But mere professional\
      knowledge, I assure you\'97pray forgive it!\'94 He made a little half\
      airy movement with his hand, as who should say: \'93Such things\'97such\
      things will happen to us all!\'94\
\
      \'93Very well, then,\'94 said Soames, moistening his lips: \'93there\'92s no\
      need to say more. I\'92m instructing Linkman and Laver of Budge Row\
      to act for me. I don\'92t want to hear your evidence, but kindly\
      make your report to them at five o\'92clock, and continue to observe\
      the utmost secrecy.\'94\
\
      Mr. Polteed half closed his eyes, as if to comply at once. \'93My\
      dear sir,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93Are you convinced,\'94 asked Soames with sudden energy, \'93that there\
      is enough?\'94\
\
      The faintest movement occurred to Mr. Polteed\'92s shoulders.\
\
      \'93You can risk it,\'94 he murmured; \'93with what we have, and human\
      nature, you can risk it.\'94\
\
      Soames rose. \'93You will ask for Mr. Linkman. Thanks; don\'92t get\
      up.\'94 He could not bear Mr. Polteed to slide as usual between him\
      and the door. In the sunlight of Piccadilly he wiped his\
      forehead. This had been the worst of it\'97he could stand the\
      strangers better. And he went back into the City to do what still\
      lay before him.\
\
      That evening in Park Lane, watching his father dine, he was\
      overwhelmed by his old longing for a son\'97a son, to watch _him_\
      eat as he went down the years, to be taken on _his_ knee as James\
      on a time had been wont to take him; a son of his own begetting,\
      who could understand him because he was the same flesh and\
      blood\'97understand, and comfort him, and become more rich and\
      cultured than himself because he would start even better off. To\
      get old\'97like that thin, grey wiry-frail figure sitting there\'97and\
      be quite alone with possessions heaping up around him; to take no\
      interest in anything because it had no future and must pass away\
      from him to hands and mouths and eyes for whom he cared no jot!\
      No! He would force it through now, and be free to marry, and have\
      a son to care for him before he grew to be like the old old man\
      his father, wistfully watching now his sweetbread, now his son.\
\
      In that mood he went up to bed. But, lying warm between those\
      fine linen sheets of Emily\'92s providing, he was visited by\
      memories and torture. Visions of Irene, almost the solid feeling\
      of her body, beset him. Why had he ever been fool enough to see\
      her again, and let this flood back on him so that it was pain to\
      think of her with that fellow\'97that stealing fellow.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER VI A SUMMER DAY\
\
\
      His boy was seldom absent from Jolyon\'92s mind in the days which\
      followed the first walk with Irene in Richmond Park. No further\
      news had come; enquiries at the War Office elicited nothing; nor\
      could he expect to hear from June and Holly for three weeks at\
      least. In these days he felt how insufficient were his memories\
      of Jolly, and what an amateur of a father he had been. There was\
      not a single memory in which anger played a part; not one\
      reconciliation, because there had never been a rupture; nor one\
      heart-to-heart confidence, not even when Jolly\'92s mother died.\
      Nothing but half-ironical affection. He had been too afraid of\
      committing himself in any direction, for fear of losing his\
      liberty, or interfering with that of his boy.\
\
      Only in Irene\'92s presence had he relief, highly complicated by the\
      ever-growing perception of how divided he was between her and his\
      son. With Jolly was bound up all that sense of continuity and\
      social creed of which he had drunk deeply in his youth and again\
      during his boy\'92s public school and varsity life\'97all that sense of\
      not going back on what father and son expected of each other.\
      With Irene was bound up all his delight in beauty and in Nature.\
      And he seemed to know less and less which was the stronger within\
      him. From such sentimental paralysis he was rudely awakened,\
      however, one afternoon, just as he was starting off to Richmond,\
      by a young man with a bicycle and a face oddly familiar, who came\
      forward faintly smiling.\
\
      \'93Mr. Jolyon Forsyte? Thank you!\'94 Placing an envelope in Jolyon\'92s\
      hand he wheeled off the path and rode away. Bewildered, Jolyon\
      opened it.\
\
      \'93Admiralty Probate and Divorce, Forsyte _v._ Forsyte and\
      Forsyte!\'94\
\
      A sensation of shame and disgust was followed by the instant\
      reaction \'93Why, here\'92s the very thing you want, and you don\'92t like\
      it!\'94 But she must have had one too; and he must go to her at\
      once. He turned things over as he went along. It was an ironical\
      business. For, whatever the Scriptures said about the heart, it\
      took more than mere longings to satisfy the law. They could\
      perfectly well defend this suit, or at least in good faith try\
      to. But the idea of doing so revolted Jolyon. If not her lover in\
      deed he was in desire, and he knew that she was ready to come to\
      him. Her face had told him so. Not that he exaggerated her\
      feeling for him. She had had her grand passion, and he could not\
      expect another from her at his age. But she had trust in him,\
      affection for him, and must feel that he would be a refuge.\
      Surely she would not ask him to defend the suit, knowing that he\
      adored her! Thank Heaven she had not that maddening British\
      conscientiousness which refused happiness for the sake of\
      refusing! She must rejoice at this chance of being free after\
      seventeen years of death in life! As to publicity, the fat was in\
      the fire! To defend the suit would not take away the slur. Jolyon\
      had all the proper feeling of a Forsyte whose privacy is\
      threatened: If he was to be hung by the Law, by all means let it\
      be for a sheep! Moreover the notion of standing in a witness box\
      and swearing to the truth that no gesture, not even a word of\
      love had passed between them seemed to him more degrading than to\
      take the tacit stigma of being an adulterer\'97more truly degrading,\
      considering the feeling in his heart, and just as bad and painful\
      for his children. The thought of explaining away, if he could,\
      before a judge and twelve average Englishmen, their meetings in\
      Paris, and the walks in Richmond Park, horrified him. The\
      brutality and hypocritical censoriousness of the whole process;\
      the probability that they would not be believed\'97the mere vision\
      of her, whom he looked on as the embodiment of Nature and of\
      Beauty, standing there before all those suspicious, gloating eyes\
      was hideous to him. No, no! To defend a suit only made a London\
      holiday, and sold the newspapers. A thousand times better accept\
      what Soames and the gods had sent!\
\
      \'93Besides,\'94 he thought honestly, \'93who knows whether, even for my\
      boy\'92s sake, I could have stood this state of things much longer?\
      Anyway, her neck will be out of chancery at last!\'94 Thus absorbed,\
      he was hardly conscious of the heavy heat. The sky had become\
      overcast, purplish with little streaks of white. A heavy\
      heat-drop plashed a little star pattern in the dust of the road\
      as he entered the Park. \'93Phew!\'94 he thought, \'93thunder! I hope\
      she\'92s not come to meet me; there\'92s a ducking up there!\'94 But at\
      that very minute he saw Irene coming towards the Gate. \'93We must\
      scuttle back to Robin Hill,\'94 he thought.\
\
      The storm had passed over the Poultry at four o\'92clock, bringing\
      welcome distraction to the clerks in every office. Soames was\
      drinking a cup of tea when a note was brought in to him:\
\
      \'93DEAR SIR,\
\
      _Forsyte v. Forsyte and Forsyte_\
\
          \'93In accordance with your instructions, we beg to inform you\
          that we personally served the respondent and co-respondent in\
          this suit to-day, at Richmond, and Robin Hill, respectively.\
\
      \'93Faithfully yours,\
      \'93LINKMAN AND LAVER.\'94\
\
      For some minutes Soames stared at that note. Ever since he had\
      given those instructions he had been tempted to annul them. It\
      was so scandalous, such a general disgrace! The evidence, too,\
      what he had heard of it, had never seemed to him conclusive;\
      somehow, he believed less and less that those two had gone all\
      lengths. But this, of course, would drive them to it; and he\
      suffered from the thought. That fellow to have her love, where he\
      had failed! Was it too late? Now that they had been brought up\
      sharp by service of this petition, had he not a lever with which\
      he could force them apart? \'93But if I don\'92t act at once,\'94 he\
      thought, \'93it will be too late, now they\'92ve had this thing. I\'92ll\
      go and see him; I\'92ll go down!\'94\
\
      And, sick with nervous anxiety, he sent out for one of the\
      \'93new-fangled\'94 motor-cabs. It might take a long time to run that\
      fellow to ground, and Goodness knew what decision they might come\
      to after such a shock! \'93If I were a theatrical ass,\'94 he thought,\
      \'93I suppose I should be taking a horse-whip or a pistol or\
      something!\'94 He took instead a bundle of papers in the case of\
      \'93Magentie versus Wake,\'94 intending to read them on the way down.\
      He did not even open them, but sat quite still, jolted and\
      jarred, unconscious of the draught down the back of his neck, or\
      the smell of petrol. He must be guided by the fellow\'92s attitude;\
      the great thing was to keep his head!\
\
      London had already begun to disgorge its workers as he neared\
      Putney Bridge; the ant-heap was on the move outwards. What a lot\
      of ants, all with a living to get, holding on by their eyelids in\
      the great scramble! Perhaps for the first time in his life Soames\
      thought: \'93_I_ could let go if I liked! Nothing could touch me; I\
      could snap my fingers, live as I wished\'97enjoy myself!\'94 No! One\
      could not live as he had and just drop it all\'97settle down in\
      Capua, to spend the money and reputation he had made. A man\'92s\
      life was what he possessed and sought to possess. Only fools\
      thought otherwise\'97fools, and socialists, and libertines!\
\
      The cab was passing villas now, going a great pace. \'93Fifteen\
      miles an hour, I should think!\'94 he mused; \'93this\'92ll take people\
      out of town to live!\'94 and he thought of its bearing on the\
      portions of London owned by his father\'97he himself had never taken\
      to that form of investment, the gambler in him having all the\
      outlet needed in his pictures. And the cab sped on, down the hill\
      past Wimbledon Common. This interview! Surely a man of fifty-two\
      with grown-up children, and hung on the line, would not be\
      reckless. \'93He won\'92t want to disgrace the family,\'94 he thought; \'93he\
      was as fond of his father as I am of mine, and they were\
      brothers. That woman brings destruction\'97what is it in her? I\'92ve\
      never known.\'94 The cab branched off, along the side of a wood, and\
      he heard a late cuckoo calling, almost the first he had heard\
      that year. He was now almost opposite the site he had originally\
      chosen for his house, and which had been so unceremoniously\
      rejected by Bosinney in favour of his own choice. He began\
      passing his handkerchief over his face and hands, taking deep\
      breaths to give him steadiness. \'93Keep one\'92s head,\'94 he thought,\
      \'93keep one\'92s head!\'94\
\
      The cab turned in at the drive which might have been his own, and\
      the sound of music met him. He had forgotten the fellow\'92s\
      daughters.\
\
      \'93I may be out again directly,\'94 he said to the driver, \'93or I may\
      be kept some time\'94; and he rang the bell.\
\
      Following the maid through the curtains into the inner hall, he\
      felt relieved that the impact of this meeting would be broken by\
      June or Holly, whichever was playing in there, so that with\
      complete surprise he saw Irene at the piano, and Jolyon sitting\
      in an armchair listening. They both stood up. Blood surged into\
      Soames\'92 brain, and all his resolution to be guided by this or\
      that left him utterly. The look of his farmer forbears\'97dogged\
      Forsytes down by the sea, from \'93Superior Dosset\'94 back\'97grinned out\
      of his face.\
\
      \'93Very pretty!\'94 he said.\
\
      He heard the fellow murmur:\
\
      \'93This is hardly the place\'97we\'92ll go to the study, if you don\'92t\
      mind.\'94 And they both passed him through the curtain opening. In\
      the little room to which he followed them, Irene stood by the\
      open window, and the \'93fellow\'94 close to her by a big chair. Soames\
      pulled the door to behind him with a slam; the sound carried him\
      back all those years to the day when he had shut out Jolyon\'97shut\
      him out for meddling with his affairs.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said, \'93what have you to say for yourselves?\'94\
\
      The fellow had the effrontery to smile.\
\
      \'93What we have received to-day has taken away your right to ask. I\
      should imagine you will be glad to have your neck out of\
      chancery.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 said Soames; \'93you think so! I came to tell you that I\'92ll\
      divorce her with every circumstance of disgrace to you both,\
      unless you swear to keep clear of each other from now on.\'94\
\
      He was astonished at his fluency, because his mind was stammering\
      and his hands twitching. Neither of them answered; but their\
      faces seemed to him as if contemptuous.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said; \'93you\'97Irene?\'94\
\
      Her lips moved, but Jolyon laid his hand on her arm.\
\
      \'93Let her alone!\'94 said Soames furiously. \'93Irene, will you swear\
      it?\'94\
\
      \'93No.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! and you?\'94\
\
      \'93Still less.\'94\
\
      \'93So then you\'92re guilty, are you?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, guilty.\'94 It was Irene speaking in that serene voice, with\
      that unreached air which had maddened him so often; and, carried\
      beyond himself, he cried:\
\
      \'93_You_ are a devil.\'94\
\
      \'93Go out! Leave this house, or I\'92ll do you an injury.\'94\
\
      That fellow to talk of injuries! Did he know how near his throat\
      was to being scragged?\
\
      \'93A trustee,\'94 he said, \'93embezzling trust property! A thief,\
      stealing his cousin\'92s wife.\'94\
\
      \'93Call me what you like. You have chosen your part, we have chosen\
      ours. Go out!\'94\
\
      If he had brought a weapon Soames might have used it at that\
      moment.\
\
      \'93I\'92ll make you pay!\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93I shall be very happy.\'94\
\
      At that deadly turning of the meaning of his speech by the son of\
      him who had nicknamed him \'93the man of property,\'94 Soames stood\
      glaring. It was ridiculous!\
\
      There they were, kept from violence by some secret force. No blow\
      possible, no words to meet the case. But he could not, did not\
      know how to turn and go away. His eyes fastened on Irene\'92s\
      face\'97the last time he would ever see that fatal face\'97the last\
      time, no doubt!\
\
      \'93You,\'94 he said suddenly, \'93I hope you\'92ll treat him as you treated\
      me\'97that\'92s all.\'94\
\
      He saw her wince, and with a sensation not quite triumph, not\
      quite relief, he wrenched open the door, passed out through the\
      hall, and got into his cab. He lolled against the cushion with\
      his eyes shut. Never in his life had he been so near to murderous\
      violence, never so thrown away the restraint which was his second\
      nature. He had a stripped and naked feeling, as if all virtue had\
      gone out of him\'97life meaningless, mind-striking work. Sunlight\
      streamed in on him, but he felt cold. The scene he had passed\
      through had gone from him already, what was before him would not\
      materialise, he could catch on to nothing; and he felt\
      frightened, as if he had been hanging over the edge of a\
      precipice, as if with another turn of the screw sanity would have\
      failed him. \'93I\'92m not fit for it,\'94 he thought; \'93I mustn\'92t\'97I\'92m not\
      fit for it.\'94 The cab sped on, and in mechanical procession trees,\
      houses, people passed, but had no significance. \'93I feel very\
      queer,\'94 he thought; \'93I\'92ll take a Turkish bath.\'97I\'92ve been very\
      near to something. It won\'92t do.\'94 The cab whirred its way back\
      over the bridge, up the Fulham Road, along the Park.\
\
      \'93To the Hammam,\'94 said Soames.\
\
      Curious that on so warm a summer day, heat should be so\
      comforting! Crossing into the hot room he met George Forsyte\
      coming out, red and glistening.\
\
      \'93Hallo!\'94 said George; \'93what are you training for? You\'92ve not got\
      much superfluous.\'94\
\
      Buffoon! Soames passed him with his sideway smile. Lying back,\
      rubbing his skin uneasily for the first signs of perspiration, he\
      thought: \'93Let them laugh! I _won\'92t_ feel anything! I can\'92t stand\
      violence! It\'92s not good for me!\'94\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER VII A SUMMER NIGHT\
\
\
      Soames left dead silence in the little study. \'93Thank you for that\
      good lie,\'94 said Jolyon suddenly. \'93Come out\'97the air in here is not\
      what it was!\'94\
\
      In front of a long high southerly wall on which were trained\
      peach-trees the two walked up and down in silence. Old Jolyon had\
      planted some cupressus-trees, at intervals, between this grassy\
      terrace and the dipping meadow full of buttercups and ox-eyed\
      daisies; for twelve years they had flourished, till their dark\
      spiral shapes had quite a look of Italy. Birds fluttered softly\
      in the wet shrubbery; the swallows swooped past, with a\
      steel-blue sheen on their swift little bodies; the grass felt\
      springy beneath the feet, its green refreshed; butterflies chased\
      each other. After that painful scene the quiet of Nature was\
      wonderfully poignant. Under the sun-soaked wall ran a narrow\
      strip of garden-bed full of mignonette and pansies, and from the\
      bees came a low hum in which all other sounds were set\'97the mooing\
      of a cow deprived of her calf, the calling of a cuckoo from an\
      elm-tree at the bottom of the meadow. Who would have thought that\
      behind them, within ten miles, London began\'97that London of the\
      Forsytes, with its wealth, its misery; its dirt and noise; its\
      jumbled stone isles of beauty, its grey sea of hideous brick and\
      stucco? That London which had seen Irene\'92s early tragedy, and\
      Jolyon\'92s own hard days; that web; that princely workhouse of the\
      possessive instinct!\
\
      And while they walked Jolyon pondered those words: \'93I hope you\'92ll\
      treat him as you treated me.\'94 That would depend on himself. Could\
      he trust himself? Did Nature permit a Forsyte not to make a slave\
      of what he adored? Could beauty be confided to him? Or should she\
      not be just a visitor, coming when she would, possessed for\
      moments which passed, to return only at her own choosing? \'93We are\
      a breed of spoilers!\'94 thought Jolyon, \'93close and greedy; the\
      bloom of life is not safe with us. Let her come to me as she\
      will, when she will, not at all if she will not. Let me be just\
      her stand-by, her perching-place; never\'97never her cage!\'94\
\
      She was the chink of beauty in his dream. Was he to pass through\
      the curtains now and reach her? Was the rich stuff of many\
      possessions, the close encircling fabric of the possessive\
      instinct walling in that little black figure of himself, and\
      Soames\'97was it to be rent so that he could pass through into his\
      vision, find there something not of the senses only? \'93Let me,\'94 he\
      thought, \'93ah! let me only know how not to grasp and destroy!\'94\
\
      But at dinner there were plans to be made. To-night she would go\
      back to the hotel, but tomorrow he would take her up to London.\
      He must instruct his solicitor\'97Jack Herring. Not a finger must be\
      raised to hinder the process of the Law. Damages exemplary,\
      judicial strictures, costs, what they liked\'97let it go through at\
      the first moment, so that her neck might be out of chancery at\
      last! To-morrow he would see Herring\'97they would go and see him\
      together. And then\'97abroad, leaving no doubt, no difficulty about\
      evidence, making the lie she had told into the truth. He looked\
      round at her; and it seemed to his adoring eyes that more than a\
      woman was sitting there. The spirit of universal beauty, deep,\
      mysterious, which the old painters, Titian, Giorgione,\
      Botticelli, had known how to capture and transfer to the faces of\
      their women\'97this flying beauty seemed to him imprinted on her\
      brow, her hair, her lips, and in her eyes.\
\
      \'93And this is to be mine!\'94 he thought. \'93It frightens me!\'94\
\
      After dinner they went out on to the terrace to have coffee. They\
      sat there long, the evening was so lovely, watching the summer\
      night come very slowly on. It was still warm and the air smelled\
      of lime blossom\'97early this summer. Two bats were flighting with\
      the faint mysterious little noise they make. He had placed the\
      chairs in front of the study window, and moths flew past to visit\
      the discreet light in there. There was no wind, and not a whisper\
      in the old oak-tree twenty yards away! The moon rose from behind\
      the copse, nearly full; and the two lights struggled, till\
      moonlight conquered, changing the colour and quality of all the\
      garden, stealing along the flagstones, reaching their feet,\
      climbing up, changing their faces.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Jolyon at last, \'93you\'92ll be tired, dear; we\'92d better\
      start. The maid will show you Holly\'92s room,\'94 and he rang the\
      study bell. The maid who came handed him a telegram. Watching her\
      take Irene away, he thought: \'93This must have come an hour or more\
      ago, and she didn\'92t bring it out to us! That shows! Well, we\'92ll\
      be hung for a sheep soon!\'94 And, opening the telegram, he read:\
\
      \'93JOLYON FORSYTE, Robin Hill.\'97Your son passed painlessly away on\
      June 20th. Deep sympathy\'94\'97some name unknown to him.\
\
      He dropped it, spun round, stood motionless. The moon shone in on\
      him; a moth flew in his face. The first day of all that he had\
      not thought almost ceaselessly of Jolly. He went blindly towards\
      the window, struck against the old armchair\'97his father\'92s\'97and sank\
      down on to the arm of it. He sat there huddled forward, staring\
      into the night. Gone out like a candle flame; far from home, from\
      love, all by himself, in the dark! His boy! From a little chap\
      always so good to him\'97so friendly! Twenty years old, and cut down\
      like grass\'97to have no life at all! \'93I didn\'92t really know him,\'94 he\
      thought, \'93and he didn\'92t know me; but we loved each other. It\'92s\
      only love that matters.\'94\
\
      To die out there\'97lonely\'97wanting them\'97wanting home! This seemed to\
      his Forsyte heart more painful, more pitiful than death itself.\
      No shelter, no protection, no love at the last! And all the\
      deeply rooted clanship in him, the family feeling and essential\
      clinging to his own flesh and blood which had been so strong in\
      old Jolyon was so strong in all the Forsytes\'97felt outraged, cut,\
      and torn by his boy\'92s lonely passing. Better far if he had died\
      in battle, without time to long for them to come to him, to call\
      out for them, perhaps, in his delirium!\
\
      The moon had passed behind the oak-tree now, endowing it with\
      uncanny life, so that it seemed watching him\'97the oak-tree his boy\
      had been so fond of climbing, out of which he had once fallen and\
      hurt himself, and hadn\'92t cried!\
\
      The door creaked. He saw Irene come in, pick up the telegram and\
      read it. He heard the faint rustle of her dress. She sank on her\
      knees close to him, and he forced himself to smile at her. She\
      stretched up her arms and drew his head down on her shoulder. The\
      perfume and warmth of her encircled him; her presence gained\
      slowly his whole being.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER VIII JAMES IN WAITING\
\
\
      Sweated to serenity, Soames dined at the Remove and turned his\
      face toward Park Lane. His father had been unwell lately. This\
      would have to be kept from him! Never till that moment had he\
      realised how much the dread of bringing James\'92 grey hairs down\
      with sorrow to the grave had counted with him; how intimately it\
      was bound up with his own shrinking from scandal. His affection\
      for his father, always deep, had increased of late years with the\
      knowledge that James looked on him as the real prop of his\
      decline. It seemed pitiful that one who had been so careful all\
      his life and done so much for the family name\'97so that it was\
      almost a byword for solid, wealthy respectability\'97should at his\
      last gasp have to see it in all the newspapers. This was like\
      lending a hand to Death, that final enemy of Forsytes. \'93I must\
      tell mother,\'94 he thought, \'93and when it comes on, we must keep the\
      papers from him somehow. He sees hardly anyone.\'94 Letting himself\
      in with his latchkey, he was beginning to ascend he stairs when\
      he became conscious of commotion on the second-floor landing. His\
      mother\'92s voice was saying:\
\
      \'93Now, James, you\'92ll catch cold. Why can\'92t you wait quietly?\'94\
\
      His father\'92s answering\
\
      \'93Wait? I\'92m always waiting. Why doesn\'92t he come in?\'94\
\
      \'93You can speak to him to-morrow morning, instead of making a guy\
      of yourself on the landing.\'94\
\
      \'93He\'92ll go up to bed, I shouldn\'92t wonder. I shan\'92t sleep.\'94\
\
      \'93Now come back to bed, James.\'94\
\
      \'93Um! I might die before to-morrow morning for all you can tell.\'94\
\
      \'93You shan\'92t have to wait till to-morrow morning; I\'92ll go down and\
      bring him up. Don\'92t fuss!\'94\
\
      \'93There you go\'97always so cock-a-hoop. He mayn\'92t come in at all.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, if he doesn\'92t come in you won\'92t catch him by standing out\
      here in your dressing-gown.\'94\
\
      Soames rounded the last bend and came in sight of his father\'92s\
      tall figure wrapped in a brown silk quilted gown, stooping over\
      the balustrade above. Light fell on his silvery hair and\
      whiskers, investing his head with a sort of halo.\
\
      \'93Here he is!\'94 he heard him say in a voice which sounded injured,\
      and his mother\'92s comfortable answer from the bedroom door:\
\
      \'93That\'92s all right. Come in, and I\'92ll brush your hair.\'94 James\
      extended a thin, crooked finger, oddly like the beckoning of a\
      skeleton, and passed through the doorway of his bedroom.\
\
      \'93What is it?\'94 thought Soames. \'93What has he got hold of now?\'94\
\
      His father was sitting before the dressing-table sideways to the\
      mirror, while Emily slowly passed two silver-backed brushes\
      through and through his hair. She would do this several times a\
      day, for it had on him something of the effect produced on a cat\
      by scratching between its ears.\
\
      \'93There you are!\'94 he said. \'93I\'92ve been waiting.\'94\
\
      Soames stroked his shoulder, and, taking up a silver button-hook,\
      examined the mark on it.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said, \'93you\'92re looking better.\'94\
\
      James shook his head.\
\
      \'93I want to say something. Your mother hasn\'92t heard.\'94 He announced\
      Emily\'92s ignorance of what he hadn\'92t told her, as if it were a\
      grievance.\
\
      \'93Your father\'92s been in a great state all the evening. I\'92m sure I\
      don\'92t know what about.\'94\
\
      The faint \'93whisk-whisk\'94 of the brushes continued the soothing of\
      her voice.\
\
      \'93No! you know nothing,\'94 said James. \'93Soames can tell me.\'94 And,\
      fixing his grey eyes, in which there was a look of strain,\
      uncomfortable to watch, on his son, he muttered:\
\
      \'93I\'92m getting on, Soames. At my age I can\'92t tell. I might die any\
      time. There\'92ll be a lot of money. There\'92s Rachel and Cicely got\
      no children; and Val\'92s out there\'97that chap his father will get\
      hold of all he can. And somebody\'92ll pick up Imogen, I shouldn\'92t\
      wonder.\'94\
\
      Soames listened vaguely\'97he had heard all this before.\
      Whish-whish! went the brushes.\
\
      \'93If that\'92s all!\'94 said Emily.\
\
      \'93All!\'94 cried James; \'93it\'92s nothing. I\'92m coming to that.\'94 And again\
      his eyes strained pitifully at Soames.\
\
      \'93It\'92s you, my boy,\'94 he said suddenly; \'93you ought to get a\
      divorce.\'94\
\
      That word, from those of all lips, was almost too much for\
      Soames\'92 composure. His eyes reconcentrated themselves quickly on\
      the buttonhook, and as if in apology James hurried on:\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know what\'92s become of her\'97they say she\'92s abroad. Your\
      Uncle Swithin used to admire her\'97he was a funny fellow.\'94 (So he\
      always alluded to his dead twin\'97\'93The Stout and the Lean of it,\'94\
      they had been called.) \'93She wouldn\'92t be alone, I should say.\'94 And\
      with that summing-up of the effect of beauty on human nature, he\
      was silent, watching his son with eyes doubting as a bird\'92s.\
      Soames, too, was silent. Whish-whish went the brushes.\
\
      \'93Come, James! Soames knows best. It\'92s his business.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 said James, and the word came from deep down; \'93but there\'92s\
      all my money, and there\'92s his\'97who\'92s it to go to? And when he dies\
      the name goes out.\'94\
\
      Soames replaced the button-hook on the lace and pink silk of the\
      dressing-table coverlet.\
\
      \'93The name?\'94 said Emily, \'93there are all the other Forsytes.\'94\
\
      \'93As if that helped me,\'94 muttered James. \'93I shall be in my grave,\
      and there\'92ll be nobody, unless he marries again.\'94\
\
      \'93You\'92re quite right,\'94 said Soames quietly; \'93I\'92m getting a\
      divorce.\'94\
\
      James\'92 eyes almost started from his head.\
\
      \'93What?\'94 he cried. \'93There! nobody tells me anything.\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Emily, \'93who would have imagined you wanted it? My\
      dear boy, that _is_ a surprise, after all these years.\'94\
\
      \'93It\'92ll be a scandal,\'94 muttered James, as if to himself; \'93but I\
      can\'92t help that. Don\'92t brush so hard. When\'92ll it come on?\'94\
\
      \'93Before the Long Vacation; it\'92s not defended.\'94\
\
      James\'92 lips moved in secret calculation. \'93I shan\'92t live to see my\
      grandson,\'94 he muttered.\
\
      Emily ceased brushing. \'93Of course you will, James. Soames will be\
      as quick as he can.\'94\
\
      There was a long silence, till James reached out his arm.\
\
      \'93Here! let\'92s have the eau-de-Cologne,\'94 and, putting it to his\
      nose, he moved his forehead in the direction of his son. Soames\
      bent over and kissed that brow just where the hair began. A\
      relaxing quiver passed over James\'92 face, as though the wheels of\
      anxiety within were running down.\
\
      \'93I\'92ll get to bed,\'94 he said; \'93I shan\'92t want to see the papers when\
      that comes. They\'92re a morbid lot; I can\'92t pay attention to them,\
      I\'92m too old.\'94\
\
      Queerly affected, Soames went to the door; he heard his father\
      say:\
\
      \'93Here, I\'92m tired. I\'92ll say a prayer in bed.\'94\
\
      And his mother answering\
\
      \'93That\'92s right, James; it\'92ll be ever so much more comfy.\'94\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER IX OUT OF THE WEB\
\
\
      On Forsyte \'92Change the announcement of Jolly\'92s death, among a\
      batch of troopers, caused mixed sensation. Strange to read that\
      Jolyon Forsyte (fifth of the name in direct descent) had died of\
      disease in the service of his country, and not be able to feel it\
      personally. It revived the old grudge against his father for\
      having estranged himself. For such was still the prestige of old\
      Jolyon that the other Forsytes could never quite feel, as might\
      have been expected, that it was they who had cut off his\
      descendants for irregularity. The news increased, of course, the\
      interest and anxiety about Val; but then Val\'92s name was Dartie,\
      and even if he were killed in battle or got the Victoria Cross,\
      it would not be at all the same as if his name were Forsyte. Not\
      even casualty or glory to the Haymans would be really\
      satisfactory. Family pride felt defrauded.\
\
      How the rumour arose, then, that \'93something very dreadful, my\
      dear,\'94 was pending, no one, least of all Soames, could tell,\
      secret as he kept everything. Possibly some eye had seen \'93Forsyte\
      _v._ Forsyte and Forsyte,\'94 in the cause list; and had added it to\
      \'93Irene in Paris with a fair beard.\'94 Possibly some wall at Park\
      Lane had ears. The fact remained that it _was_ known\'97whispered\
      among the old, discussed among the young\'97that family pride must\
      soon receive a blow.\
\
      Soames, paying one of his Sunday visits to Timothy\'92s\'97paying it\
      with the feeling that after the suit came on he would be paying\
      no more\'97felt knowledge in the air as he came in. Nobody, of\
      course, dared speak of it before him, but each of the four other\
      Forsytes present held their breath, aware that nothing could\
      prevent Aunt Juley from making them all uncomfortable. She looked\
      so piteously at Soames, she checked herself on the point of\
      speech so often, that Aunt Hester excused herself and said she\
      must go and bathe Timothy\'92s eye\'97he had a sty coming. Soames,\
      impassive, slightly supercilious, did not stay long. He went out\
      with a curse stifled behind his pale, just smiling lips.\
\
      Fortunately for the peace of his mind, cruelly tortured by the\
      coming scandal, he was kept busy day and night with plans for his\
      retirement\'97for he had come to that grim conclusion. To go on\
      seeing all those people who had known him as a \'93long-headed\
      chap,\'94 an astute adviser\'97after _that_\'97no! The fastidiousness and\
      pride which was so strangely, so inextricably blended in him with\
      possessive obtuseness, revolted against the thought. He would\
      retire, live privately, go on buying pictures, make a great name\
      as a collector\'97after all, his heart was more in that than it had\
      ever been in Law. In pursuance of this now fixed resolve, he had\
      to get ready to amalgamate his business with another firm without\
      letting people know, for that would excite curiosity and make\
      humiliation cast its shadow before. He had pitched on the firm of\
      Cuthcott, Holliday and Kingson, two of whom were dead. The full\
      name after the amalgamation would therefore be Cuthcott,\
      Holliday, Kingson, Forsyte, Bustard and Forsyte. But after debate\
      as to which of the dead still had any influence with the living,\
      it was decided to reduce the title to Cuthcott, Kingson and\
      Forsyte, of whom Kingson would be the active and Soames the\
      sleeping partner. For leaving his name, prestige, and clients\
      behind him, Soames would receive considerable value.\
\
      One night, as befitted a man who had arrived at so important a\
      stage of his career, he made a calculation of what he was worth,\
      and after writing off liberally for depreciation by the war,\
      found his value to be some hundred and thirty thousand pounds. At\
      his father\'92s death, which could not, alas, be delayed much\
      longer, he must come into at least another fifty thousand, and\
      his yearly expenditure at present just reached two. Standing\
      among his pictures, he saw before him a future full of bargains\
      earned by the trained faculty of knowing better than other\
      people. Selling what was about to decline, keeping what was still\
      going up, and exercising judicious insight into future taste, he\
      would make a unique collection, which at his death would pass to\
      the nation under the title \'93Forsyte Bequest.\'94\
\
      If the divorce went through, he had determined on his line with\
      Madame Lamotte. She had, he knew, but one real ambition\'97to live\
      on her \'93_rentes_\'94 in Paris near her grandchildren. He would buy\
      the goodwill of the Restaurant Bretagne at a fancy price. Madame\
      would live like a Queen-Mother in Paris on the interest, invested\
      as she would know how. (Incidentally Soames meant to put a\
      capable manager in her place, and make the restaurant pay good\
      interest on his money. There were great possibilities in Soho.)\
      On Annette he would promise to settle fifteen thousand pounds\
      (whether designedly or not), precisely the sum old Jolyon had\
      settled on \'93that woman.\'94\
\
      A letter from Jolyon\'92s solicitor to his own had disclosed the\
      fact that \'93those two\'94 were in Italy. And an opportunity had been\
      duly given for noting that they had first stayed at an hotel in\
      London. The matter was clear as daylight, and would be disposed\
      of in half an hour or so; but during that half-hour he, Soames,\
      would go down to hell; and after that half-hour all bearers of\
      the Forsyte name would feel the bloom was off the rose. He had no\
      illusions like Shakespeare that roses by any other name would\
      smell as sweet. The name was a possession, a concrete, unstained\
      piece of property, the value of which would be reduced some\
      twenty per cent. at least. Unless it were Roger, who had once\
      refused to stand for Parliament, and\'97oh, irony!\'97Jolyon, hung on\
      the line, there had never been a distinguished Forsyte. But that\
      very lack of distinction was the name\'92s greatest asset. It was a\
      private name, intensely individual, and his own property; it had\
      never been exploited for good or evil by intrusive report. He and\
      each member of his family owned it wholly, sanely, secretly,\
      without any more interference from the public than had been\
      necessitated by their births, their marriages, their deaths. And\
      during these weeks of waiting and preparing to drop the Law, he\
      conceived for that Law a bitter distaste, so deeply did he resent\
      its coming violation of his name, forced on him by the need he\
      felt to perpetuate that name in a lawful manner. The monstrous\
      injustice of the whole thing excited in him a perpetual\
      suppressed fury. He had asked no better than to live in spotless\
      domesticity, and now he must go into the witness box, after all\
      these futile, barren years, and proclaim his failure to keep his\
      wife\'97incur the pity, the amusement, the contempt of his kind. It\
      was all upside down. She and that fellow ought to be the\
      sufferers, and they\'97were in Italy! In these weeks the Law he had\
      served so faithfully, looked on so reverently as the guardian of\
      all property, seemed to him quite pitiful. What could be more\
      insane than to tell a man that he owned his wife, and punish him\
      when someone unlawfully took her away from him? Did the Law not\
      know that a man\'92s name was to him the apple of his eye, that it\
      was far harder to be regarded as cuckold than as seducer? He\
      actually envied Jolyon the reputation of succeeding where he,\
      Soames, had failed. The question of damages worried him, too. He\
      wanted to make that fellow suffer, but he remembered his cousin\'92s\
      words, \'93I shall be very happy,\'94 with the uneasy feeling that to\
      claim damages would make not Jolyon but himself suffer; he felt\
      uncannily that Jolyon would rather like to pay them\'97the chap was\
      so loose. Besides, to claim damages was not the thing to do. The\
      claim, indeed, had been made almost mechanically; and as the hour\
      drew near Soames saw in it just another dodge of this insensitive\
      and topsy-turvy Law to make him ridiculous; so that people might\
      sneer and say: \'93Oh, yes, he got quite a good price for her!\'94 And\
      he gave instructions that his Counsel should state that the money\
      would be given to a Home for Fallen Women. He was a long time\
      hitting off exactly the right charity; but, having pitched on it,\
      he used to wake up in the night and think: \'93It won\'92t do, too\
      lurid; it\'92ll draw attention. Something quieter\'97better taste.\'94 He\
      did not care for dogs, or he would have named them; and it was in\
      desperation at last\'97for his knowledge of charities was\
      limited\'97that he decided on the blind. That could not be\
      inappropriate, and it would make the Jury assess the damages\
      high.\
\
      A good many suits were dropping out of the list, which happened\
      to be exceptionally thin that summer, so that his case would be\
      reached before August. As the day grew nearer, Winifred was his\
      only comfort. She showed the fellow-feeling of one who had been\
      through the mill, and was the \'93femme-sole\'94 in whom he confided,\
      well knowing that she would not let Dartie into her confidence.\
      That ruffian would be only too rejoiced! At the end of July, on\
      the afternoon before the case, he went in to see her. They had\
      not yet been able to leave town, because Dartie had already spent\
      their summer holiday, and Winifred dared not go to her father for\
      more money while he was waiting not to be told anything about\
      this affair of Soames.\
\
      Soames found her with a letter in her hand.\
\
      \'93That from Val,\'94 he asked gloomily. \'93What does he say?\'94\
\
      \'93He says he\'92s married,\'94 said Winifred.\
\
      \'93Whom to, for Goodness\'92 sake?\'94\
\
      Winifred looked up at him.\
\
      \'93To Holly Forsyte, Jolyon\'92s daughter.\'94\
\
      \'93What?\'94\
\
      \'93He got leave and did it. I didn\'92t even know he knew her.\
      Awkward, isn\'92t it?\'94\
\
      Soames uttered a short laugh at that characteristic minimisation.\
\
      \'93Awkward! Well, I don\'92t suppose they\'92ll hear about this till they\
      come back. They\'92d better stay out there. That fellow will give\
      her money.\'94\
\
      \'93But I want Val back,\'94 said Winifred almost piteously; \'93I miss\
      him, he helps me to get on.\'94\
\
      \'93I know,\'94 murmured Soames. \'93How\'92s Dartie behaving now?\'94\
\
      \'93It might be worse; but it\'92s always money. Would you like me to\
      come down to the Court to-morrow, Soames?\'94\
\
      Soames stretched out his hand for hers. The gesture so betrayed\
      the loneliness in him that she pressed it between her two.\
\
      \'93Never mind, old boy. You\'92ll feel ever so much better when it\'92s\
      all over.\'94\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know what I\'92ve done,\'94 said Soames huskily; \'93I never\
      have. It\'92s all upside down. I was fond of her; I\'92ve always been.\'94\
\
      Winifred saw a drop of blood ooze out of his lip, and the sight\
      stirred her profoundly.\
\
      \'93Of course,\'94 she said, \'93it\'92s been _too_ bad of her all along! But\
      what shall I do about this marriage of Val\'92s, Soames? I don\'92t\
      know how to write to him, with this coming on. You\'92ve seen that\
      child. Is she pretty?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, she\'92s pretty,\'94 said Soames. \'93Dark\'97lady-like enough.\'94\
\
      \'93That doesn\'92t sound so bad,\'94 thought Winifred. \'93Jolyon had\
      style.\'94\
\
      \'93It is a coil,\'94 she said. \'93What will father say?\
\
      \'93Mustn\'92t be told,\'94 said Soames. \'93The war\'92ll soon be over now,\
      you\'92d better let Val take to farming out there.\'94\
\
      It was tantamount to saying that his nephew was lost.\
\
      \'93I haven\'92t told Monty,\'94 Winifred murmured desolately.\
\
      The case was reached before noon next day, and was over in little\
      more than half an hour. Soames\'97pale, spruce, sad-eyed in the\
      witness-box\'97had suffered so much beforehand that he took it all\
      like one dead. The moment the decree nisi was pronounced he left\
      the Courts of Justice.\
\
      Four hours until he became public property! \'93Solicitor\'92s divorce\
      suit!\'94 A surly, dogged anger replaced that dead feeling within\
      him. \'93Damn them all!\'94 he thought; \'93I won\'92t run away. I\'92ll act as\
      if nothing had happened.\'94 And in the sweltering heat of Fleet\
      Street and Ludgate Hill he walked all the way to his City Club,\
      lunched, and went back to his office. He worked there stolidly\
      throughout the afternoon.\
\
      On his way out he saw that his clerks knew, and answered their\
      involuntary glances with a look so sardonic that they were\
      immediately withdrawn. In front of St. Paul\'92s, he stopped to buy\
      the most gentlemanly of the evening papers. Yes! there he was!\
      \'93Well-known solicitor\'92s divorce. Cousin co-respondent. Damages\
      given to the blind\'94\'97so, they had got that in! At every other\
      face, he thought: \'93I wonder if you know!\'94 And suddenly he felt\
      queer, as if something were racing round in his head.\
\
      What was this? He was letting it get hold of him! He mustn\'92t! He\
      would be ill. He mustn\'92t think! He would get down to the river\
      and row about, and fish. \'93I\'92m not going to be laid up,\'94 he\
      thought.\
\
      It flashed across him that he had something of importance to do\
      before he went out of town. Madame Lamotte! He must explain the\
      Law. Another six months before he was really free! Only he did\
      not want to see Annette! And he passed his hand over the top of\
      his head\'97it was very hot.\
\
      He branched off through Covent Garden. On this sultry day of late\
      July the garbage-tainted air of the old market offended him, and\
      Soho seemed more than ever the disenchanted home of\
      rapscallionism. Alone, the Restaurant Bretagne, neat, daintily\
      painted, with its blue tubs and the dwarf trees therein, retained\
      an aloof and Frenchified self-respect. It was the slack hour, and\
      pale trim waitresses were preparing the little tables for dinner.\
      Soames went through into the private part. To his discomfiture\
      Annette answered his knock. She, too, looked pale and dragged\
      down by the heat.\
\
      \'93You are quite a stranger,\'94 she said languidly.\
\
      Soames smiled.\
\
      \'93I haven\'92t wished to be; I\'92ve been busy.\'94\
\
      \'93Where\'92s your mother, Annette? I\'92ve got some news for her.\'94\
\
      \'93Mother is not in.\'94\
\
      It seemed to Soames that she looked at him in a queer way. What\
      did she know? How much had her mother told her? The worry of\
      trying to make that out gave him an alarming feeling in the head.\
      He gripped the edge of the table, and dizzily saw Annette come\
      forward, her eyes clear with surprise. He shut his own and said:\
\
      \'93It\'92s all right. I\'92ve had a touch of the sun, I think.\'94 The sun!\
      What he had was a touch of darkness! Annette\'92s voice, French and\
      composed, said:\
\
      \'93Sit down, it will pass, then.\'94 Her hand pressed his shoulder,\
      and Soames sank into a chair. When the dark feeling dispersed,\
      and he opened his eyes, she was looking down at him. What an\
      inscrutable and odd expression for a girl of twenty!\
\
      \'93Do you feel better?\'94\
\
      \'93It\'92s nothing,\'94 said Soames. Instinct told him that to be feeble\
      before her was not helping him\'97age was enough handicap without\
      that. Will-power was his fortune with Annette, he had lost ground\
      these latter months from indecision\'97he could not afford to lose\
      any more. He got up, and said:\
\
      \'93I\'92ll write to your mother. I\'92m going down to my river house for\
      a long holiday. I want you both to come there presently and stay.\
      It\'92s just at its best. You will, won\'92t you?\'94\
\
      \'93It will be veree nice.\'94 A pretty little roll of that \'93r\'94 but no\
      enthusiasm. And rather sadly he added:\
\
      \'93You\'92re feeling the heat, too, aren\'92t you, Annette? It\'92ll do you\
      good to be on the river. Good-night.\'94 Annette swayed forward.\
      There was a sort of compunction in the movement.\
\
      \'93Are you fit to go? Shall I give you some coffee?\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Soames firmly. \'93Give me your hand.\'94\
\
      She held out her hand, and Soames raised it to his lips. When he\
      looked up, her face wore again that strange expression. \'93I can\'92t\
      tell,\'94 he thought, as he went out; \'93but I mustn\'92t think\'97I mustn\'92t\
      worry.\'94\
\
      But worry he did, walking toward Pall Mall. English, not of her\
      religion, middle-aged, scarred as it were by domestic tragedy,\
      what had he to give her? Only wealth, social position, leisure,\
      admiration! It was much, but was it enough for a beautiful girl\
      of twenty? He felt so ignorant about Annette. He had, too, a\
      curious fear of the French nature of her mother and herself. They\
      knew so well what they wanted. They were almost Forsytes. They\
      would never grasp a shadow and miss a substance.\
\
      The tremendous effort it was to write a simple note to Madame\
      Lamotte when he reached his Club warned him still further that he\
      was at the end of his tether.\
\
      \'93MY DEAR MADAME (he said),\
          \'93You will see by the enclosed newspaper cutting that I\
          obtained my decree of divorce to-day. By the English Law I\
          shall not, however, be free to marry again till the decree is\
          confirmed six months hence. In the meanwhile I have the honor\
          to ask to be considered a formal suitor for the hand of your\
          daughter. I shall write again in a few days and beg you both\
          to come and stay at my river house.\
\
      \'93I am, dear Madame,\
      \'93Sincerely yours,\
      \'93SOAMES FORSYTE.\'94\
\
      Having sealed and posted this letter, he went into the\
      dining-room. Three mouthfuls of soup convinced him that he could\
      not eat; and, causing a cab to be summoned, he drove to\
      Paddington Station and took the first train to Reading. He\
      reached his house just as the sun went down, and wandered out on\
      to the lawn. The air was drenched with the scent of pinks and\
      picotees in his flower-borders. A stealing coolness came off the\
      river.\
\
      Rest\'97peace! Let a poor fellow rest! Let not worry and shame and\
      anger chase like evil night-birds in his head! Like those doves\
      perched half-sleeping on their dovecot, like the furry creatures\
      in the woods on the far side, and the simple folk in their\
      cottages, like the trees and the river itself, whitening fast in\
      twilight, like the darkening cornflower-blue sky where stars were\
      coming up\'97let him cease _from himself_, and rest!\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER X PASSING OF AN AGE\
\
\
      The marriage of Soames with Annette took place in Paris on the\
      last day of January, 1901, with such privacy that not even Emily\
      was told until it was accomplished.\
\
      The day after the wedding he brought her to one of those quiet\
      hotels in London where greater expense can be incurred for less\
      result than anywhere else under heaven. Her beauty in the best\
      Parisian frocks was giving him more satisfaction than if he had\
      collected a perfect bit of china, or a jewel of a picture; he\
      looked forward to the moment when he would exhibit her in Park\
      Lane, in Green Street, and at Timothy\'92s.\
\
      If some one had asked him in those days, \'93In confidence\'97are you\
      in love with this girl?\'94 he would have replied: \'93In love? What is\
      love? If you mean do I feel to her as I did towards Irene in\
      those old days when I first met her and she would not have me;\
      when I sighed and starved after her and couldn\'92t rest a minute\
      until she yielded\'97no! If you mean do I admire her youth and\
      prettiness, do my senses ache a little when I see her moving\
      about\'97yes! Do I think she will keep me straight, make me a\
      creditable wife and a good mother for my children?\'97again, yes!\'94\
\
      \'93What more do I need? and what more do three-quarters of the\
      women who are married get from the men who marry them?\'94 And if\
      the enquirer had pursued his query, \'93And do you think it was fair\
      to have tempted this girl to give herself to you for life unless\
      you have really touched her heart?\'94 he would have answered: \'93The\
      French see these things differently from us. They look at\
      marriage from the point of view of establishments and children;\
      and, from my own experience, I am not at all sure that theirs is\
      not the sensible view. I shall not expect this time more than I\
      can get, or she can give. Years hence I shouldn\'92t be surprised if\
      I have trouble with her; but I shall be getting old, I shall have\
      children by then. I shall shut my eyes. I have had my great\
      passion; hers is perhaps to come\'97I don\'92t suppose it will be for\
      me. I offer her a great deal, and I don\'92t expect much in return,\
      except children, or at least a son. But one thing I am sure\
      of\'97she has very good sense!\'94\
\
      And if, insatiate, the enquirer had gone on, \'93You do not look,\
      then, for spiritual union in this marriage?\'94 Soames would have\
      lifted his sideway smile, and rejoined: \'93That\'92s as it may be. If\
      I get satisfaction for my senses, perpetuation of myself; good\
      taste and good humour in the house; it is all I can expect at my\
      age. I am not likely to be going out of my way towards any\
      far-fetched sentimentalism.\'94 Whereon, the enquirer must in good\
      taste have ceased enquiry.\
\
      The Queen was dead, and the air of the greatest city upon earth\
      grey with unshed tears. Fur-coated and top-hatted, with Annette\
      beside him in dark furs, Soames crossed Park Lane on the morning\
      of the funeral procession, to the rails in Hyde Park. Little\
      moved though he ever was by public matters, this event, supremely\
      symbolical, this summing-up of a long rich period, impressed his\
      fancy. In \'9237, when she came to the throne, \'93Superior Dosset\'94 was\
      still building houses to make London hideous; and James, a\
      stripling of twenty-six, just laying the foundations of his\
      practice in the Law. Coaches still ran; men wore stocks, shaved\
      their upper lips, ate oysters out of barrels; \'93tigers\'94 swung\
      behind cabriolets; women said, \'93La!\'94 and owned no property; there\
      were manners in the land, and pigsties for the poor; unhappy\
      devils were hanged for little crimes, and Dickens had but just\
      begun to write. Well-nigh two generations had slipped by\'97of\
      steamboats, railways, telegraphs, bicycles, electric light,\
      telephones, and now these motorcars\'97of such accumulated wealth,\
      that eight per cent. had become three, and Forsytes were numbered\
      by the thousand! Morals had changed, manners had changed, men had\
      become monkeys twice-removed, God had become Mammon\'97Mammon so\
      respectable as to deceive himself: Sixty-four years that favoured\
      property, and had made the upper middle class; buttressed,\
      chiselled, polished it, till it was almost indistinguishable in\
      manners, morals, speech, appearance, habit, and soul from the\
      nobility. An epoch which had gilded individual liberty so that if\
      a man had money, he was free in law and fact, and if he had not\
      money he was free in law and not in fact. An era which had\
      canonised hypocrisy, so that to seem to be respectable was to be.\
      A great Age, whose transmuting influence nothing had escaped save\
      the nature of man and the nature of the Universe.\
\
      And to witness the passing of this Age, London\'97its pet and\
      fancy\'97was pouring forth her citizens through every gate into Hyde\
      Park, hub of Victorianism, happy hunting-ground of Forsytes.\
      Under the grey heavens, whose drizzle just kept off, the dark\
      concourse gathered to see the show. The \'93good old\'94 Queen, full of\
      years and virtue, had emerged from her seclusion for the last\
      time to make a London holiday. From Houndsditch, Acton, Ealing,\
      Hampstead, Islington, and Bethnal Green; from Hackney, Hornsey,\
      Leytonstone, Battersea, and Fulham; and from those green pastures\
      where Forsytes flourish\'97Mayfair and Kensington, St. James\'92 and\
      Belgravia, Bayswater and Chelsea and the Regent\'92s Park, the\
      people swarmed down on to the roads where death would presently\
      pass with dusky pomp and pageantry. Never again would a Queen\
      reign so long, or people have a chance to see so much history\
      buried for their money. A pity the war dragged on, and that the\
      Wreath of Victory could not be laid upon her coffin! All else\
      would be there to follow and commemorate\'97soldiers, sailors,\
      foreign princes, half-masted bunting, tolling bells, and above\
      all the surging, great, dark-coated crowd, with perhaps a simple\
      sadness here and there deep in hearts beneath black clothes put\
      on by regulation. After all, more than a Queen was going to her\
      rest, a woman who had braved sorrow, lived well and wisely\
      according to her lights.\
\
      Out in the crowd against the railings, with his arm hooked in\
      Annette\'92s, Soames waited. Yes! the Age was passing! What with\
      this Trade Unionism, and Labour fellows in the House of Commons,\
      with continental fiction, and something in the general feel of\
      everything, not to be expressed in words, things were very\
      different; he recalled the crowd on Mafeking night, and George\
      Forsyte saying: \'93They\'92re all socialists, they want our goods.\'94\
      Like James, Soames didn\'92t know, he couldn\'92t tell\'97with Edward on\
      the throne! Things would never be as safe again as under good old\
      Viccy! Convulsively he pressed his young wife\'92s arm. There, at\
      any rate, was something substantially his own, domestically\
      certain again at last; something which made property worth\
      while\'97a real thing once more. Pressed close against her and\
      trying to ward others off, Soames was content. The crowd swayed\
      round them, ate sandwiches and dropped crumbs; boys who had\
      climbed the plane-trees chattered above like monkeys, threw twigs\
      and orange-peel. It was past time; they should be coming soon!\
      And, suddenly, a little behind them to the left, he saw a tallish\
      man with a soft hat and short grizzling beard, and a tallish\
      woman in a little round fur cap and veil. Jolyon and Irene\
      talking, smiling at each other, close together like Annette and\
      himself! They had not seen him; and stealthily, with a very queer\
      feeling in his heart, Soames watched those two. They looked\
      happy! What had they come here for\'97inherently illicit creatures,\
      rebels from the Victorian ideal? What business had they in this\
      crowd? Each of them twice exiled by morality\'97making a boast, as\
      it were, of love and laxity! He watched them fascinated;\
      admitting grudgingly even with his arm thrust through Annette\'92s\
      that\'97that she\'97Irene\'97No! he would _not_ admit it; and he turned\
      his eyes away. He would _not_ see them, and let the old\
      bitterness, the old longing rise up within him! And then Annette\
      turned to him and said: \'93Those two people, Soames; they know you,\
      I am sure. Who are they?\'94\
\
      Soames nosed sideways.\
\
      \'93What people?\'94\
\
      \'93There, you see them; just turning away. They know you.\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 Soames answered; \'93a mistake, my dear.\'94\
\
      \'93A lovely face! And how she walk! _Elle est tr\'e8s distingu\'e9e!_\'94\
\
      Soames looked then. Into his life, out of his life she had walked\
      like that swaying and erect, remote, unseizable; ever eluding the\
      contact of his soul! He turned abruptly from that receding vision\
      of the past.\
\
      \'93You\'92d better attend,\'94 he said, \'93they\'92re coming now!\'94\
\
      But while he stood, grasping her arm, seemingly intent on the\
      head of the procession, he was quivering with the sense of always\
      missing something, with instinctive regret that he had not got\
      them both.\
\
      Slow came the music and the march, till, in silence, the long\
      line wound in through the Park gate. He heard Annette whisper,\
      \'93How sad it is and beautiful!\'94 felt the clutch of her hand as she\
      stood up on tiptoe; and the crowd\'92s emotion gripped him. There it\
      was\'97the bier of the Queen, coffin of the Age slow passing! And as\
      it went by there came a murmuring groan from all the long line of\
      those who watched, a sound such as Soames had never heard, so\
      unconscious, primitive, deep and wild, that neither he nor any\
      knew whether they had joined in uttering it. Strange sound,\
      indeed! Tribute of an Age to its own death.... Ah! Ah!... The\
      hold on life had slipped. That which had seemed eternal was gone!\
      The Queen\'97God bless her!\
\
      It moved on with the bier, that travelling groan, as a fire moves\
      on over grass in a thin line; it kept step, and marched alongside\
      down the dense crowds mile after mile. It was a human sound, and\
      yet inhuman, pushed out by animal subconsciousness, by intimate\
      knowledge of universal death and change. None of us\'97none of us\
      can hold on for ever!\
\
      It left silence for a little\'97a very little time, till tongues\
      began, eager to retrieve interest in the show. Soames lingered\
      just long enough to gratify Annette, then took her out of the\
      Park to lunch at his father\'92s in Park Lane....\
\
      James had spent the morning gazing out of his bedroom window. The\
      last show he would see, last of so many! So she was gone! Well,\
      she was getting an old woman. Swithin and he had seen her\
      crowned\'97slim slip of a girl, not so old as Imogen! She had got\
      very stout of late. Jolyon and he had seen her married to that\
      German chap, her husband\'97he had turned out all right before he\
      died, and left her with that son of his. And he remembered the\
      many evenings he and his brothers and their cronies had wagged\
      their heads over their wine and walnuts and that fellow in his\
      salad days. And now he had come to the throne. They said he had\
      steadied down\'97he didn\'92t know\'97couldn\'92t tell! He\'92d make the money\
      fly still, he shouldn\'92t wonder. What a lot of people out there!\
      It didn\'92t seem so very long since he and Swithin stood in the\
      crowd outside Westminster Abbey when she was crowned, and Swithin\
      had taken him to Cremorne afterwards\'97racketty chap, Swithin; no,\
      it didn\'92t seem much longer ago than Jubilee Year, when he had\
      joined with Roger in renting a balcony in Piccadilly.\
\
      Jolyon, Swithin, Roger all gone, and he would be ninety in\
      August! And there was Soames married again to a French girl. The\
      French were a queer lot, but they made good mothers, he had\
      heard. Things changed! They said this German Emperor was here for\
      the funeral, his telegram to old Kruger had been in shocking\
      taste. He should not be surprised if that chap made trouble some\
      day. Change! H\'92m! Well, they must look after themselves when he\
      was gone: he didn\'92t know where he\'92d be! And now Emily had asked\
      Dartie to lunch, with Winifred and Imogen, to meet Soames\'92\
      wife\'97she was always doing something. And there was Irene living\
      with that fellow Jolyon, they said. He\'92d marry her now, he\
      supposed.\
\
      \'93My brother Jolyon,\'94 he thought, \'93what would he have said to it\
      all?\'94 And somehow the utter impossibility of knowing what his\
      elder brother, once so looked up to, would have said, so worried\
      James that he got up from his chair by the window, and began\
      slowly, feebly to pace the room.\
\
      \'93She was a pretty thing, too,\'94 he thought; \'93I was fond of her.\
      Perhaps Soames didn\'92t suit her\'97I don\'92t know\'97I can\'92t tell. We\
      never had any trouble with _our_ wives.\'94 Women had changed\
      everything had changed! And now the Queen was dead\'97well, there it\
      was! A movement in the crowd brought him to a standstill at the\
      window, his nose touching the pane and whitening from the chill\
      of it. They had got her as far as Hyde Park Corner\'97they were\
      passing now! Why didn\'92t Emily come up here where she could see,\
      instead of fussing about lunch. He missed her at that\
      moment\'97missed her! Through the bare branches of the plane-trees\
      he could just see the procession, could see the hats coming off\
      the people\'92s heads\'97a lot of them would catch colds, he shouldn\'92t\
      wonder! A voice behind him said:\
\
      \'93You\'92ve got a capital view here, James!\'94\
\
      \'93_There_ you are!\'94 muttered James; \'93why didn\'92t you come before?\
      You might have missed it!\'94\
\
      And he was silent, staring with all his might.\
\
      \'93What\'92s the noise?\'94 he asked suddenly.\
\
      \'93There\'92s no noise,\'94 returned Emily; \'93what are you thinking\
      of?\'97they wouldn\'92t cheer.\'94\
\
      \'93I can hear it.\'94\
\
      \'93Nonsense, James!\'94\
\
      No sound came through those double panes; what James heard was\
      the groaning in his own heart at sight of his Age passing.\
\
      \'93Don\'92t you ever tell me where I\'92m buried,\'94 he said suddenly. \'93I\
      shan\'92t want to know.\'94 And he turned from the window. There she\
      went, the old Queen; she\'92d had a lot of anxiety\'97she\'92d be glad to\
      be out of it, he should think!\
\
      Emily took up the hair-brushes.\
\
      \'93There\'92ll be just time to brush your head,\'94 she said, \'93before\
      they come. You must look your best, James.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 muttered James; \'93they say she\'92s pretty.\'94\
\
      The meeting with his new daughter-in-law took place in the\
      dining-room. James was seated by the fire when she was brought\
      in. He placed, his hands on the arms of the chair and slowly\
      raised himself. Stooping and immaculate in his frock-coat, thin\
      as a line in Euclid, he received Annette\'92s hand in his; and the\
      anxious eyes of his furrowed face, which had lost its colour now,\
      doubted above her. A little warmth came into them and into his\
      cheeks, refracted from her bloom.\
\
      \'93How are you?\'94 he said. \'93You\'92ve been to see the Queen, I suppose?\
      Did you have a good crossing?\'94\
\
      In this way he greeted her from whom he hoped for a grandson of\
      his name.\
\
      Gazing at him, so old, thin, white, and spotless, Annette\
      murmured something in French which James did not understand.\
\
      \'93Yes, yes,\'94 he said, \'93you want your lunch, I expect. Soames, ring\
      the bell; we won\'92t wait for that chap Dartie.\'94 But just then they\
      arrived. Dartie had refused to go out of his way to see \'93the old\
      girl.\'94 With an early cocktail beside him, he had taken a \'93squint\'94\
      from the smoking-room of the Iseeum, so that Winifred and Imogen\
      had been obliged to come back from the Park to fetch him thence.\
      His brown eyes rested on Annette with a stare of almost startled\
      satisfaction. The second beauty that fellow Soames had picked up!\
      What women could see in him! Well, she would play him the same\
      trick as the other, no doubt; but in the meantime he was a lucky\
      devil! And he brushed up his moustache, having in nine months of\
      Green Street domesticity regained almost all his flesh and his\
      assurance. Despite the comfortable efforts of Emily, Winifred\'92s\
      composure, Imogen\'92s enquiring friendliness, Dartie\'92s showing-off,\
      and James\'92 solicitude about her food, it was not, Soames felt, a\
      successful lunch for his bride. He took her away very soon.\
\
      \'93That Monsieur Dartie,\'94 said Annette in the cab, \'93_je n\'92aime pas\
      ce type-l\'e0!_\'94\
\
      \'93No, by George!\'94 said Soames.\
\
      \'93Your sister is veree amiable, and the girl is pretty. Your\
      father is veree old. I think your mother has trouble with him; I\
      should not like to be her.\'94\
\
      Soames nodded at the shrewdness, the clear hard judgment in his\
      young wife; but it disquieted him a little. The thought may have\
      just flashed through him, too: \'93When I\'92m eighty she\'92ll be\
      fifty-five, having trouble with me!\'94\
\
      \'93There\'92s just one other house of my relations I must take you\
      to,\'94 he said; \'93you\'92ll find it funny, but we must get it over; and\
      then we\'92ll dine and go to the theatre.\'94\
\
      In this way he prepared her for Timothy\'92s. But Timothy\'92s was\
      different. They were _delighted_ to see dear Soames after this\
      long long time; and so this was Annette!\
\
      \'93You are _so_ pretty, my dear; almost too young and pretty for\
      dear Soames, aren\'92t you? But he\'92s very attentive and careful\'97such\
      a good hush....\'94 Aunt Juley checked herself, and placed her lips\
      just under each of Annette\'92s eyes\'97she afterwards described them\
      to Francie, who dropped in, as: \'93Cornflower-blue, so pretty, I\
      quite wanted to kiss them. I must say dear Soames is a perfect\
      connoisseur. In her French way, and not so very French either, I\
      think she\'92s as pretty\'97though not so distinguished, not so\
      alluring\'97as Irene. Because she was alluring, wasn\'92t she? with\
      that white skin and those dark eyes, and that hair, _couleur\
      de_\'97what was it? I always forget.\'94\
\
      \'93_Feuille morte_,\'94 Francie prompted.\
\
      \'93Of course, dead leaves\'97so strange. I remember when I was a girl,\
      before we came to London, we had a foxhound puppy\'97to \'91walk\'92 it\
      was called then; it had a tan top to its head and a white chest,\
      and beautiful dark brown eyes, and it was a lady.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, auntie,\'94 said Francie, \'93but I don\'92t see the connection.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 replied Aunt Juley, rather flustered, \'93it was so alluring,\
      and her eyes and hair, you know....\'94 She was silent, as if\
      surprised in some indelicacy. \'93_Feuille morte_,\'94 she added\
      suddenly; \'93Hester\'97do remember that!\'94....\
\
      Considerable debate took place between the two sisters whether\
      Timothy should or should not be summoned to see Annette.\
\
      \'93Oh, don\'92t bother!\'94 said Soames.\
\
      \'93But it\'92s no trouble, only of course Annette\'92s being French might\
      upset him a little. He was so scared about Fashoda. I think\
      perhaps we had better not run the risk, Hester. It\'92s nice to have\
      her all to ourselves, isn\'92t it? And how are you, Soames? Have you\
      quite got over your....\'94\
\
      Hester interposed hurriedly:\
\
      \'93What do you think of London, Annette?\'94\
\
      Soames, disquieted, awaited the reply. It came, sensible,\
      composed: \'93Oh! I know London. I have visited before.\'94\
\
      He had never ventured to speak to her on the subject of the\
      restaurant. The French had different notions about gentility, and\
      to shrink from connection with it might seem to her ridiculous;\
      he had waited to be married before mentioning it; and now he\
      wished he hadn\'92t.\
\
      \'93And what part do you know best?\'94 said Aunt Juley.\
\
      \'93Soho,\'94 said Annette simply.\
\
      Soames snapped his jaw.\
\
      \'93Soho?\'94 repeated Aunt Juley; \'93Soho?\'94\
\
      \'93That\'92ll go round the family,\'94 thought Soames.\
\
      \'93It\'92s very French, and interesting,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 murmured Aunt Juley, \'93your Uncle Roger had some houses\
      there once; he was always having to turn the tenants out, I\
      remember.\'94\
\
      Soames changed the subject to Mapledurham.\
\
      \'93Of course,\'94 said Aunt Juley, \'93you will be going down there soon\
      to settle in. We are all so looking forward to the time when\
      Annette has a dear little....\'94\
\
      \'93Juley!\'94 cried Aunt Hester desperately, \'93ring tea!\'94\
\
      Soames dared not wait for tea, and took Annette away.\
\
      \'93I shouldn\'92t mention Soho if I were you,\'94 he said in the cab.\
      \'93It\'92s rather a shady part of London; and you\'92re altogether above\
      that restaurant business now; I mean,\'94 he added, \'93I want you to\
      know nice people, and the English are fearful snobs.\'94\
\
      Annette\'92s clear eyes opened; a little smile came on her lips.\
\
      \'93Yes?\'94 she said.\
\
      \'93H\'92m!\'94 thought Soames, \'93that\'92s meant for me!\'94 and he looked at\
      her hard. \'93She\'92s got good business instincts,\'94 he thought. \'93I\
      must make her grasp it once for all!\'94\
\
      \'93Look here, Annette! it\'92s very simple, only it wants\
      understanding. Our professional and leisured classes still think\
      themselves a cut above our business classes, except of course the\
      very rich. It may be stupid, but there it is, you see. It isn\'92t\
      advisable in England to let people know that you ran a restaurant\
      or kept a shop or were in any kind of trade. It may have been\
      extremely creditable, but it puts a sort of label on you; you\
      don\'92t have such a good time, or meet such nice people\'97that\'92s\
      all.\'94\
\
      \'93I see,\'94 said Annette; \'93it is the same in France.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 murmured Soames, at once relieved and taken aback. \'93Of\
      course, class is everything, really.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Annette; \'93_comme vous \'eates sage_.\'94\
\
      \'93That\'92s all right,\'94 thought Soames, watching her lips, \'93only\
      she\'92s pretty cynical.\'94 His knowledge of French was not yet such\
      as to make him grieve that she had not said \'93tu.\'94 He slipped his\
      arm round her, and murmured with an effort:\
\
      \'93_Et vous \'eates ma belle femme_.\'94\
\
      Annette went off into a little fit of laughter.\
\
      \'93_Oh, non!_\'94 she said. \'93_Oh, non! ne parlez pas Fran\'e7ais_,\
      Soames. What is that old lady, your aunt, looking forward to?\'94\
\
      Soames bit his lip. \'93God knows!\'94 he said; \'93she\'92s always saying\
      something;\'94 but he knew better than God.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER XI SUSPENDED ANIMATION\
\
\
      The war dragged on. Nicholas had been heard to say that it would\
      cost three hundred millions if it cost a penny before they\'92d done\
      with it! The income-tax was seriously threatened. Still, there\
      would be South Africa for their money, once for all. And though\
      the possessive instinct felt badly shaken at three o\'92clock in the\
      morning, it recovered by breakfast-time with the recollection\
      that one gets nothing in this world without paying for it. So, on\
      the whole, people went about their business much as if there were\
      no war, no concentration camps, no slippery de Wet, no feeling on\
      the Continent, no anything unpleasant. Indeed, the attitude of\
      the nation was typified by Timothy\'92s map, whose animation was\
      suspended\'97for Timothy no longer moved the flags, and they could\
      not move themselves, not even backwards and forwards as they\
      should have done.\
\
      Suspended animation went further; it invaded Forsyte \'92Change, and\
      produced a general uncertainty as to what was going to happen\
      next. The announcement in the marriage column of _The Times_,\
      \'93Jolyon Forsyte to Irene, only daughter of the late Professor\
      Heron,\'94 had occasioned doubt whether Irene had been justly\
      described. And yet, on the whole, relief was felt that she had\
      not been entered as \'93Irene, late the wife,\'94 or \'93the divorced\
      wife,\'94 \'93of Soames Forsyte.\'94 Altogether, there had been a kind of\
      sublimity from the first about the way the family had taken that\
      \'93affair.\'94 As James had phrased it, \'93There it was!\'94 No use to\
      fuss! Nothing to be had out of admitting that it had been a\
      \'93nasty jar\'94\'97in the phraseology of the day.\
\
      But what would happen now that both Soames and Jolyon were\
      married again? That was very intriguing. George was known to have\
      laid Eustace six to four on a little Jolyon before a little\
      Soames. George was so droll! It was rumoured, too, that he and\
      Dartie had a bet as to whether James would attain the age of\
      ninety, though which of them had backed James no one knew.\
\
      Early in May, Winifred came round to say that Val had been\
      wounded in the leg by a spent bullet, and was to be discharged.\
      His wife was nursing him. He would have a little limp\'97nothing to\
      speak of. He wanted his grandfather to buy him a farm out there\
      where he could breed horses. Her father was giving Holly eight\
      hundred a year, so they could be quite comfortable, because his\
      grandfather would give Val five, he had said; but as to the farm,\
      he didn\'92t know\'97couldn\'92t tell: he didn\'92t want Val to go throwing\
      away his money.\
\
      \'93But you know,\'94 said Winifred, \'93he must do something.\'94\
\
      Aunt Hester thought that perhaps his dear grandfather was wise,\
      because if he didn\'92t buy a farm it couldn\'92t turn out badly.\
\
      \'93But Val loves horses,\'94 said Winifred. \'93It\'92d be such an\
      occupation for him.\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley thought that horses were very uncertain, had not\
      Montague found them so?\
\
      \'93Val\'92s different,\'94 said Winifred; \'93he takes after me.\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley was sure that dear Val was very clever. \'93I always\
      remember,\'94 she added, \'93how he gave his bad penny to a beggar. His\
      dear grandfather was so pleased. He thought it showed such\
      presence of mind. I remember his saying that he ought to go into\
      the Navy.\'94\
\
      Aunt Hester chimed in: Did not Winifred think that it was much\
      better for the young people to be secure and not run any risk at\
      their age?\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Winifred, \'93if they were in London, perhaps; in\
      London it\'92s amusing to do nothing. But out there, of course,\
      he\'92ll simply get bored to death.\'94\
\
      Aunt Hester thought that it would be nice for him to work, if he\
      were quite sure not to lose by it. It was not as if they had no\
      money. Timothy, of course, had done so well by retiring. Aunt\
      Juley wanted to know what Montague had said.\
\
      Winifred did not tell her, for Montague had merely remarked:\
      \'93Wait till the old man dies.\'94\
\
      At this moment Francie was announced. Her eyes were brimming with\
      a smile.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 she said, \'93what do you think of it?\'94\
\
      \'93Of what, dear?\'94\
\
      \'93In _The Times_ this morning.\'94\
\
      \'93We haven\'92t seen it, we always read it after dinner; Timothy has\
      it till then.\'94\
\
      Francie rolled her eyes.\
\
      \'93Do you think you _ought_ to tell us?\'94 said Aunt Juley. \'93What\
      _was_ it?\'94\
\
      \'93Irene\'92s had a son at Robin Hill.\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley drew in her breath. \'93But,\'94 she said, \'93they were only\
      married in March!\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, Auntie; isn\'92t it interesting?\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Winifred, \'93I\'92m glad. I was sorry for Jolyon losing\
      his boy. It might have been Val.\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley seemed to go into a sort of dream. \'93I wonder,\'94 she\
      murmured, \'93what dear Soames will think? He has so wanted to have\
      a son himself. A little bird has always told me that.\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Winifred, \'93he\'92s going to\'97bar accidents.\'94\
\
      Gladness trickled out of Aunt Juley\'92s eyes.\
\
      \'93How delightful!\'94 she said. \'93When?\'94\
\
      \'93November.\'94\
\
      Such a lucky month! But she did wish it could be sooner. It was a\
      long time for James to wait, at his age!\
\
      To wait! They dreaded it for James, but they were used to it\
      themselves. Indeed, it was their great distraction. To wait! For\
      _The Times_ to read; for one or other of their nieces or nephews\
      to come in and cheer them up; for news of Nicholas\'92 health; for\
      that decision of Christopher\'92s about going on the stage; for\
      information concerning the mine of Mrs. MacAnder\'92s nephew; for\
      the doctor to come about Hester\'92s inclination to wake up early in\
      the morning; for books from the library which were always out;\
      for Timothy to have a cold; for a nice quiet warm day, not too\
      hot, when they could take a turn in Kensington Gardens. To wait,\
      one on each side of the hearth in the drawing-room, for the clock\
      between them to strike; their thin, veined, knuckled hands plying\
      knitting-needles and crochet-hooks, their hair ordered to\
      stop\'97like Canute\'92s waves\'97from any further advance in colour. To\
      wait in their black silks or satins for the Court to say that\
      Hester might wear her dark green, and Juley her darker maroon. To\
      wait, slowly turning over and over, in their old minds the little\
      joys and sorrows, events and expectancies, of their little family\
      world, as cows chew patient cuds in a familiar field. And this\
      new event was so well worth waiting for. Soames had always been\
      their pet, with his tendency to give them pictures, and his\
      almost weekly visits which they missed so much, and his need for\
      their sympathy evoked by the wreck of his first marriage. This\
      new event\'97the birth of an heir to Soames\'97was so important for\
      him, and for his dear father, too, that James might not have to\
      die without some certainty about things. James did so dislike\
      uncertainty; and with Montague, of course, he could not feel\
      really satisfied to leave no grand-children but the young\
      Darties. After all, one\'92s own name did count! And as James\'92\
      ninetieth birthday neared they wondered what precautions he was\
      taking. He would be the first of the Forsytes to reach that age,\
      and set, as it were, a new standard in holding on to life. That\
      was so important, they felt, at their ages eighty-seven and\
      eighty-five; though they did not want to think of themselves when\
      they had Timothy, who was not yet eighty-two, to think of. There\
      was, of course, a better world. \'93In my Father\'92s house are many\
      mansions\'94 was one of Aunt Juley\'92s favourite sayings\'97it always\
      comforted her, with its suggestion of house property, which had\
      made the fortune of dear Roger. The Bible was, indeed, a great\
      resource, and on _very_ fine Sundays there was church in the\
      morning; and sometimes Juley would steal into Timothy\'92s study\
      when she was sure he was out, and just put an open New Testament\
      casually among the books on his little table\'97he was a great\
      reader, of course, having been a publisher. But she had noticed\
      that Timothy was always cross at dinner afterwards. And Smither\
      had told her more than once that she had picked books off the\
      floor in doing the room. Still, with all that, they did feel that\
      heaven could not be quite so cosy as the rooms in which they and\
      Timothy had been waiting so long. Aunt Hester, especially, could\
      not bear the thought of the exertion. Any change, or rather the\
      thought of a change\'97for there never _was_ any\'97always upset her\
      very much. Aunt Juley, who had more spirit, sometimes thought it\
      would be quite exciting; she had so enjoyed that visit to\
      Brighton the year dear Susan died. But then Brighton one knew was\
      nice, and it was so difficult to tell what heaven would be like,\
      so on the whole she was more than content to wait.\
\
      On the morning of James\'92 birthday, August the 5th, they felt\
      extraordinary animation, and little notes passed between them by\
      the hand of Smither while they were having breakfast in their\
      beds. Smither must go round and take their love and little\
      presents and find out how Mr. James was, and whether he had\
      passed a good night with all the excitement. And on the way back\
      would Smither call in at Green Street\'97it was a little out of her\
      way, but she could take the bus up Bond Street afterwards; it\
      would be a nice little change for her\'97and ask dear Mrs. Dartie to\
      be sure and look in before she went out of town.\
\
      All this Smither did\'97an undeniable servant trained many years ago\
      under Aunt Ann to a perfection not now procurable. Mr. James, so\
      Mrs. James said, had passed an excellent night, he sent his love;\
      Mrs. James had said he was very funny and had complained that he\
      didn\'92t know what all the fuss was about. Oh! and Mrs. Dartie sent\
      her love, and she would come to tea.\
\
      Aunts Juley and Hester, rather hurt that their presents had not\
      received special mention\'97they forgot every year that James could\
      not bear to receive presents, \'93throwing away their money on him,\'94\
      as he always called it\'97were \'93delighted\'94; it showed that James was\
      in good spirits, and that was so important for him. And they\
      began to wait for Winifred. She came at four, bringing Imogen,\
      and Maud, just back from school, and \'93getting such a pretty girl,\
      too,\'94 so that it was extremely difficult to ask for news about\
      Annette. Aunt Juley, however, summoned courage to enquire whether\
      Winifred had heard anything, and if Soames was anxious.\
\
      \'93Uncle Soames is always anxious, Auntie,\'94 interrupted Imogen; \'93he\
      can\'92t be happy now he\'92s got it.\'94\
\
      The words struck familiarly on Aunt Juley\'92s ears. Ah! yes; that\
      funny drawing of George\'92s, which had _not_ been shown them! But\
      what did Imogen mean? That her uncle always wanted more than he\
      could have? It was not at all nice to think like that.\
\
      Imogen\'92s voice rose clear and clipped:\
\
      \'93Imagine! Annette\'92s only two years older than me; it must be\
      awful for her, married to Uncle Soames.\'94\
\
      Aunt Juley lifted her hands in horror.\
\
      \'93My dear,\'94 she said, \'93you don\'92t know what you\'92re talking about.\
      Your Uncle Soames is a match for anybody. He\'92s a very clever man,\
      and good-looking and wealthy, and most considerate and careful,\
      and not at all old, considering everything.\'94\
\
      Imogen, turning her luscious glance from one to the other of the\
      \'93old dears,\'94 only smiled.\
\
      \'93I hope,\'94 said Aunt Juley quite severely, \'93that _you_ will marry\
      as good a man.\'94\
\
      \'93_I_ shan\'92t marry a good man, Auntie,\'94 murmured Imogen; \'93they\'92re\
      dull.\'94\
\
      \'93If you go on like this,\'94 replied Aunt Juley, still very much\
      upset, \'93you won\'92t marry anybody. We\'92d better not pursue the\
      subject;\'94 and turning to Winifred, she said: \'93How is Montague?\'94\
\
      That evening, while they were waiting for dinner, she murmured:\
\
      \'93I\'92ve told Smither to get up half a bottle of the sweet\
      champagne, Hester. I think we ought to drink dear James\'92 health,\
      and\'97and the health of Soames\'92 wife; only, let\'92s keep that quite\
      secret. I\'92ll just say like this, \'91And _you know_, Hester!\'92 and\
      then we\'92ll drink. It might upset Timothy.\'94\
\
      \'93It\'92s more likely to upset us,\'94 said Aunt Nester. \'93But we must, I\
      suppose; for such an occasion.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Aunt Juley rapturously, \'93it _is_ an occasion! Only\
      fancy if he has a dear little boy, to carry the family on! I do\
      feel it so important, now that Irene has had a son. Winifred says\
      George is calling Jolyon \'91The Three-Decker,\'92 because of his three\
      families, you know! George _is_ droll. And fancy! Irene is living\
      after all in the house Soames had built for them both. It does\
      seem hard on dear Soames; and he\'92s always been so regular.\'94\
\
      That night in bed, excited and a little flushed still by her\
      glass of wine and the secrecy of the second toast, she lay with\
      her prayer-book opened flat, and her eyes fixed on a ceiling\
      yellowed by the light from her reading-lamp. Young things! It was\
      so nice for them all! And she would be so happy if she could see\
      dear Soames happy. But, of course, he must be now, in spite of\
      what Imogen had said. He would have all that he wanted: property,\
      and wife, and children! And he would live to a green old age,\
      like his dear father, and forget all about Irene and that\
      dreadful case. If only she herself could be here to buy his\
      children their first rocking-horse! Smither should choose it for\
      her at the stores, nice and dappled. Ah! how Roger used to rock\
      her until she fell off! Oh dear! that was a long time ago! It\
      _was!_ \'93In my Father\'92s house are many mansions\'97\'94A little\
      scrattling noise caught her ear\'97\'93but no mice!\'94 she thought\
      mechanically. The noise increased. There! it _was_ a mouse! How\
      naughty of Smither to say there wasn\'92t! It would be eating\
      through the wainscot before they knew where they were, and they\
      would have to have the builders in. They were such destructive\
      things! And she lay, with her eyes just moving, following in her\
      mind that little scrattling sound, and waiting for sleep to\
      release her from it.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER XII BIRTH OF A FORSYTE\
\
\
      Soames walked out of the garden door, crossed the lawn, stood on\
      the path above the river, turned round and walked back to the\
      garden door, without having realised that he had moved. The sound\
      of wheels crunching the drive convinced him that time had passed,\
      and the doctor gone. What, exactly, had he said?\
\
      \'93This is the position, Mr. Forsyte. I can make pretty certain of\
      her life if I operate, but the baby will be born dead. If I don\'92t\
      operate, the baby will most probably be born alive, but it\'92s a\
      great risk for the mother\'97a great risk. In either case I don\'92t\
      think she can ever have another child. In her state she obviously\
      can\'92t decide for herself, and we can\'92t wait for her mother. It\'92s\
      for you to make the decision, while I\'92m getting what\'92s necessary.\
      I shall be back within the hour.\'94\
\
      The decision! What a decision! No time to get a specialist down!\
      No time for anything!\
\
      The sound of wheels died away, but Soames still stood intent;\
      then, suddenly covering his ears, he walked back to the river. To\
      come before its time like this, with no chance to foresee\
      anything, not even to get her mother here! It was for her mother\
      to make that decision, and she couldn\'92t arrive from Paris till\
      to-night! If only he could have understood the doctor\'92s jargon,\
      the medical niceties, so as to be sure he was weighing the\
      chances properly; but they were Greek to him\'97like a legal problem\
      to a layman. And yet he _must_ decide! He brought his hand away\
      from his brow wet, though the air was chilly. These sounds which\
      came from her room! To go back there would only make it more\
      difficult. He must be calm, clear. On the one hand life, nearly\
      certain, of his young wife, death quite certain, of his child;\
      and\'97no more children afterwards! On the other, death _perhaps_ of\
      his wife, nearly certain life for the child; and\'97no more children\
      afterwards! Which to choose?.... It had rained this last\
      fortnight\'97the river was very full, and in the water, collected\
      round the little house-boat moored by his landing-stage, were\
      many leaves from the woods above, brought off by a frost. Leaves\
      fell, lives drifted down\'97Death! To decide about death! And no one\
      to give him a hand. Life lost was lost for good. Let nothing go\
      that you could keep; for, if it went, you couldn\'92t get it back.\
      It left you bare, like those trees when they lost their leaves;\
      barer and barer until you, too, withered and came down. And, by a\
      queer somersault of thought, he seemed to see not Annette lying\
      up there behind that window-pane on which the sun was shining,\
      but Irene lying in their bedroom in Montpellier Square, as it\
      might conceivably have been her fate to lie, sixteen years ago.\
      Would he have hesitated then? Not a moment! Operate, operate!\
      Make certain of her life! No decision\'97a mere instinctive cry for\
      help, in spite of his knowledge, even then, that she did not love\
      him! But this! Ah! there was nothing overmastering in his feeling\
      for Annette! Many times these last months, especially since she\
      had been growing frightened, he had wondered. She had a will of\
      her own, was selfish in her French way. And yet\'97so pretty! What\
      would she wish\'97to take the risk. \'93I know she wants the child,\'94 he\
      thought. \'93If it\'92s born dead, and no more chance afterwards\'97it\'92ll\
      upset her terribly. No more chance! All for nothing! Married life\
      with her for years and years without a child. Nothing to steady\
      her! She\'92s too young. Nothing to look forward to, for her\'97for me!\
      _For me!_\'94 He struck his hands against his chest! Why couldn\'92t he\
      think without bringing himself in\'97get out of himself and see what\
      he ought to do? The thought hurt him, then lost edge, as if it\
      had come in contact with a breastplate. Out of oneself!\
      Impossible! Out into soundless, scentless, touchless, sightless\
      space! The very idea was ghastly, futile! And touching there the\
      bedrock of reality, the bottom of his Forsyte spirit, Soames\
      rested for a moment. When one ceased, all ceased; it might go on,\
      but there\'92d be nothing in it!\
\
      He looked at his watch. In half an hour the doctor would be back.\
      He _must_ decide! If against the operation and she died, how face\
      her mother and the doctor afterwards? How face his own\
      conscience? It was _his_ child that she was having. If for the\
      operation\'97then he condemned them both to childlessness. And for\
      what else had he married her but to have a lawful heir? And his\
      father\'97at death\'92s door, waiting for the news! \'93It\'92s cruel!\'94 he\
      thought; \'93I ought never to have such a thing to settle! It\'92s\
      cruel!\'94 He turned towards the house. Some deep, simple way of\
      deciding! He took out a coin, and put it back. If he spun it, he\
      knew he would not abide by what came up! He went into the\
      dining-room, furthest away from that room whence the sounds\
      issued. The doctor had said there was a chance. In here that\
      chance seemed greater; the river did not flow, nor the leaves\
      fall. A fire was burning. Soames unlocked the tantalus. He hardly\
      ever touched spirits, but now\'97he poured himself out some whisky\
      and drank it neat, craving a faster flow of blood. \'93That fellow\
      Jolyon,\'94 he thought; \'93he had children already. He has the woman I\
      really loved; and now a son by her! And I\'97I\'92m asked to destroy my\
      only child! Annette _can\'92t_ die; it\'92s not possible. She\'92s\
      strong!\'94\
\
      He was still standing sullenly at the sideboard when he heard the\
      doctor\'92s carriage, and went out to him. He had to wait for him to\
      come downstairs.\
\
      \'93Well, doctor?\'94\
\
      \'93The situation\'92s the same. Have you decided?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Soames; \'93don\'92t operate!\'94\
\
      \'93Not? You understand\'97the risk\'92s great?\'94\
\
      In Soames\'92 set face nothing moved but the lips.\
\
      \'93You said there was a chance?\'94\
\
      \'93A chance, yes; not much of one.\'94\
\
      \'93You say the baby _must_ be born dead if you do?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      \'93Do you still think that in any case she can\'92t have another?\'94\
\
      \'93One can\'92t be absolutely sure, but it\'92s most unlikely.\'94\
\
      \'93She\'92s strong,\'94 said Soames; \'93we\'92ll take the risk.\'94\
\
      The doctor looked at him very gravely. \'93It\'92s on your shoulders,\'94\
      he said; \'93with my own wife, I couldn\'92t.\'94\
\
      Soames\'92 chin jerked up as if someone had hit him.\
\
      \'93Am I of any use up there?\'94 he asked.\
\
      \'93No; keep away.\'94\
\
      \'93I shall be in my picture-gallery, then; you know where.\'94\
\
      The doctor nodded, and went upstairs.\
\
      Soames continued to stand, listening. \'93By this time to-morrow,\'94\
      he thought, \'93I may have her death on my hands.\'94 No! it was\
      unfair\'97monstrous, to put it that way! Sullenness dropped on him\
      again, and he went up to the gallery. He stood at the window. The\
      wind was in the north; it was cold, clear; very blue sky, heavy\
      ragged white clouds chasing across; the river blue, too, through\
      the screen of goldening trees; the woods all rich with colour,\
      glowing, burnished\'97an early autumn. If it were his own life,\
      would he be taking that risk? \'93But _she\'92d_ take the risk of\
      losing me,\'94 he thought, \'93sooner than lose her child! She doesn\'92t\
      really love me!\'94 What could one expect\'97a girl and French? The one\
      thing really vital to them both, vital to their marriage and\
      their futures, was a child! \'93I\'92ve been through a lot for this,\'94\
      he thought, \'93I\'92ll hold on\'97hold on. There\'92s a chance of keeping\
      both\'97a chance!\'94 One kept till things were taken\'97one naturally\
      kept! He began walking round the gallery. He had made one\
      purchase lately which he knew was a fortune in itself, and he\
      halted before it\'97a girl with dull gold hair which looked like\
      filaments of metal gazing at a little golden monster she was\
      holding in her hand. Even at this tortured moment he could just\
      feel the extraordinary nature of the bargain he had made\'97admire\
      the quality of the table, the floor, the chair, the girl\'92s\
      figure, the absorbed expression on her face, the dull gold\
      filaments of her hair, the bright gold of the little monster.\
      Collecting pictures; growing richer, richer! What use, if...! He\
      turned his back abruptly on the picture, and went to the window.\
      Some of his doves had flown up from their perches round the\
      dovecot, and were stretching their wings in the wind. In the\
      clear sharp sunlight their whiteness almost flashed. They flew\
      far, making a flung-up hieroglyphic against the sky. Annette fed\
      the doves; it was pretty to see her. They took it out of her\
      hand; they knew she was matter-of-fact. A choking sensation came\
      into his throat. She would not\'97could not die! She was too\'97too\
      sensible; and she was strong, really strong, like her mother, in\
      spite of her fair prettiness.\
\
      It was already growing dark when at last he opened the door, and\
      stood listening. Not a sound! A milky twilight crept about the\
      stairway and the landings below. He had turned back when a sound\
      caught his ear. Peering down, he saw a black shape moving, and\
      his heart stood still. What was it? Death? The shape of Death\
      coming from her door? No! only a maid without cap or apron. She\
      came to the foot of his flight of stairs and said breathlessly:\
\
      \'93The doctor wants to see you, sir.\'94\
\
      He ran down. She stood flat against the wall to let him pass, and\
      said:\
\
      \'93Oh, Sir! it\'92s over.\'94\
\
      \'93Over?\'94 said Soames, with a sort of menace; \'93what d\'92you mean?\'94\
\
      \'93It\'92s born, sir.\'94\
\
      He dashed up the four steps in front of him, and came suddenly on\
      the doctor in the dim passage. The man was wiping his brow.\
\
      \'93Well?\'94 he said; \'93quick!\'94\
\
      \'93Both living; it\'92s all right, I think.\'94\
\
      Soames stood quite still, covering his eyes.\
\
      \'93I congratulate you,\'94 he heard the doctor say; \'93it was touch and\
      go.\'94\
\
      Soames let fall the hand which was covering his face.\
\
      \'93Thanks,\'94 he said; \'93thanks very much. What is it?\'94\
\
      \'93Daughter\'97luckily; a son would have killed her\'97the head.\'94\
\
      A daughter!\
\
      \'93The utmost care of both,\'94 he hears the doctor say, \'93and we shall\
      do. When does the mother come?\'94\
\
      \'93To-night, between nine and ten, I hope.\'94\
\
      \'93I\'92ll stay till then. Do you want to see them?\'94\
\
      \'93Not now,\'94 said Soames; \'93before you go. I\'92ll have dinner sent up\
      to you.\'94 And he went downstairs.\
\
      Relief unspeakable, and yet\'97a daughter! It seemed to him unfair.\
      To have taken that risk\'97to have been through this agony\'97and what\
      agony!\'97for a daughter! He stood before the blazing fire of wood\
      logs in the hall, touching it with his toe and trying to readjust\
      himself. \'93My father!\'94 he thought. A bitter disappointment, no\
      disguising it! One never got all one wanted in this life! And\
      there was no other\'97at least, if there was, it was no use!\
\
      While he was standing there, a telegram was brought him.\
\
      \'93Come up at once, your father sinking fast.\'97MOTHER.\'94\
\
      He read it with a choking sensation. One would have thought he\
      couldn\'92t feel anything after these last hours, but he felt this.\
      Half-past seven, a train from Reading at nine, and madame\'92s\
      train, if she had caught it, came in at eight-forty\'97he would meet\
      that, and go on. He ordered the carriage, ate some dinner\
      mechanically, and went upstairs. The doctor came out to him.\
\
      \'93They\'92re sleeping.\'94\
\
      \'93I won\'92t go in,\'94 said Soames with relief. \'93My father\'92s dying; I\
      have to\'97go up. Is it all right?\'94\
\
      The doctor\'92s face expressed a kind of doubting admiration. \'93If\
      they were all as unemotional\'94 he might have been saying.\
\
      \'93Yes, I think you may go with an easy mind. You\'92ll be down soon?\'94\
\
      \'93To-morrow,\'94 said Soames. \'93Here\'92s the address.\'94\
\
      The doctor seemed to hover on the verge of sympathy.\
\
      \'93Good-night!\'94 said Soames abruptly, and turned away. He put on\
      his fur coat. Death! It was a chilly business. He smoked a\
      cigarette in the carriage\'97one of his rare cigarettes. The night\
      was windy and flew on black wings; the carriage lights had to\
      search out the way. His father! That old, old man! A comfortless\
      night\'97to die!\
\
      The London train came in just as he reached the station, and\
      Madame Lamotte, substantial, dark-clothed, very yellow in the\
      lamplight, came towards the exit with a dressing-bag.\
\
      \'93This all you have?\'94 asked Soames.\
\
      \'93But yes; I had not the time. How is my little one?\'94\
\
      \'93Doing well\'97both. A girl!\'94\
\
      \'93A girl! What joy! I had a frightful crossing!\'94\
\
      Her black bulk, solid, unreduced by the frightful crossing,\
      climbed into the brougham.\
\
      \'93And you, _mon cher?_\'94\
\
      \'93My father\'92s dying,\'94 said Soames between his teeth. \'93I\'92m going\
      up. Give my love to Annette.\'94\
\
      \'93_Tiens!_\'94 murmured Madame Lamotte; \'93_quel malheur!_\'94\
\
      Soames took his hat off, and moved towards his train. \'93The\
      French!\'94 he thought.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER XIII JAMES IS TOLD\
\
\
      A simple cold, caught in the room with double windows, where the\
      air and the people who saw him were filtered, as it were, the\
      room he had not left since the middle of September\'97and James was\
      in deep waters. A little cold, passing his little strength and\
      flying quickly to his lungs. \'93He mustn\'92t catch cold,\'94 the doctor\
      had declared, and he had gone and caught it. When he first felt\
      it in his throat he had said to his nurse\'97for he had one\
      now\'97\'93There, I knew how it would be, airing the room like that!\'94\
      For a whole day he was highly nervous about himself and went in\
      advance of all precautions and remedies; drawing every breath\
      with extreme care and having his temperature taken every hour.\
      Emily was not alarmed.\
\
      But next morning when she went in the nurse whispered: \'93He won\'92t\
      have his temperature taken.\'94\
\
      Emily crossed to the side of the bed where he was lying, and said\
      softly, \'93How do you feel, James?\'94 holding the thermometer to his\
      lips. James looked up at her.\
\
      \'93What\'92s the good of that?\'94 he murmured huskily; \'93I don\'92t want to\
      know.\'94\
\
      Then she _was_ alarmed. He breathed with difficulty, he looked\
      terribly frail, white, with faint red discolorations. She had\
      \'93had trouble\'94 with him, Goodness knew; but he was James, had been\
      James for nearly fifty years; she couldn\'92t remember or imagine\
      life without James\'97James, behind all his fussiness, his\
      pessimism, his crusty shell, deeply affectionate, really kind and\
      generous to them all!\
\
      All that day and the next he hardly uttered a word, but there was\
      in his eyes a noticing of everything done for him, a look on his\
      face which told her he was fighting; and she did not lose hope.\
      His very stillness, the way he conserved every little scrap of\
      energy, showed the tenacity with which he was fighting. It\
      touched her deeply; and though her face was composed and\
      comfortable in the sick-room, tears ran down her cheeks when she\
      was out of it.\
\
      About tea-time on the third day\'97she had just changed her dress,\
      keeping her appearance so as not to alarm him, because he noticed\
      everything\'97she saw a difference. \'93It\'92s no use; I\'92m tired,\'94 was\
      written plainly across that white face, and when she went up to\
      him, he muttered: \'93Send for Soames.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, James,\'94 she said comfortably; \'93all right\'97at once.\'94 And she\
      kissed his forehead. A tear dropped there, and as she wiped it\
      off she saw that his eyes looked grateful. Much upset, and\
      without hope now, she sent Soames the telegram.\
\
      When he entered out of the black windy night, the big house was\
      still as a grave. Warmson\'92s broad face looked almost narrow; he\
      took the fur coat with a sort of added care, saying:\
\
      \'93Will you have a glass of wine, sir?\'94\
\
      Soames shook his head, and his eyebrows made enquiry.\
\
      Warmson\'92s lips twitched. \'93He\'92s asking for you, sir;\'94 and suddenly\
      he blew his nose. \'93It\'92s a long time, sir,\'94 he said, \'93that I\'92ve\
      been with Mr. Forsyte\'97a long time.\'94\
\
      Soames left him folding the coat, and began to mount the stairs.\
      This house, where he had been born and sheltered, had never\
      seemed to him so warm, and rich, and cosy, as during this last\
      pilgrimage to his father\'92s room. It was not his taste; but in its\
      own substantial, lincrusta way it was the acme of comfort and\
      security. And the night was so dark and windy; the grave so cold\
      and lonely!\
\
      He paused outside the door. No sound came from within. He turned\
      the handle softly and was in the room before he was perceived.\
      The light was shaded. His mother and Winifred were sitting on the\
      far side of the bed; the nurse was moving away from the near side\
      where was an empty chair. \'93For me!\'94 thought Soames. As he moved\
      from the door his mother and sister rose, but he signed with his\
      hand and they sat down again. He went up to the chair and stood\
      looking at his father. James\'92 breathing was as if strangled; his\
      eyes were closed. And in Soames, looking on his father so worn\
      and white and wasted, listening to his strangled breathing, there\
      rose a passionate vehemence of anger against Nature, cruel,\
      inexorable Nature, kneeling on the chest of that wisp of a body,\
      slowly pressing out the breath, pressing out the life of the\
      being who was dearest to him in the world. His father, of all\
      men, had lived a careful life, moderate, abstemious, and this was\
      his reward\'97to have life slowly, painfully squeezed out of him!\
      And, without knowing that he spoke, he said: \'93It\'92s cruel!\'94\
\
      He saw his mother cover her eyes and Winifred bow her face\
      towards the bed. Women! They put up with things so much better\
      than men. He took a step nearer to his father. For three days\
      James had not been shaved, and his lips and chin were covered\
      with hair, hardly more snowy than his forehead. It softened his\
      face, gave it a queer look already not of this world. His eyes\
      opened. Soames went quite close and bent over. The lips moved.\
\
      \'93Here I am, Father:\'94\
\
      \'93Um\'97what\'97what news? They never tell....\'94 the voice died, and a\
      flood of emotion made Soames\'92 face work so that he could not\
      speak. Tell him?\'97yes. But what? He made a great effort, got his\
      lips together, and said:\
\
      \'93Good news, dear, good\'97Annette, a son.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 It was the queerest sound, ugly, relieved, pitiful,\
      triumphant\'97like the noise a baby makes getting what it wants. The\
      eyes closed, and that strangled sound of breathing began again.\
      Soames recoiled to the chair and stonily sat down. The lie he had\
      told, based, as it were, on some deep, temperamental instinct\
      that after death James would not know the truth, had taken away\
      all power of feeling for the moment. His arm brushed against\
      something. It was his father\'92s naked foot. In the struggle to\
      breathe he had pushed it out from under the clothes. Soames took\
      it in his hand, a cold foot, light and thin, white, very cold.\
      What use to put it back, to wrap up that which must be colder\
      soon! He warmed it mechanically with his hand, listening to his\
      father\'92s laboured breathing; while the power of feeling rose\
      again within him. A little sob, quickly smothered, came from\
      Winifred, but his mother sat unmoving with her eyes fixed on\
      James. Soames signed to the nurse.\
\
      \'93Where\'92s the doctor?\'94 he whispered.\
\
      \'93He\'92s been sent for.\'94\
\
      \'93Can\'92t you do anything to ease his breathing?\'94\
\
      \'93Only an injection; and he can\'92t stand it. The doctor said, while\
      he was fighting....\'94\
\
      \'93He\'92s not fighting,\'94 whispered Soames, \'93he\'92s being slowly\
      smothered. It\'92s awful.\'94\
\
      James stirred uneasily, as if he knew what they were saying.\
      Soames rose and bent over him. James feebly moved his two hands,\
      and Soames took them.\
\
      \'93He wants to be pulled up,\'94 whispered the nurse.\
\
      Soames pulled. He thought he pulled gently, but a look almost of\
      anger passed over James\'92 face. The nurse plumped the pillows.\
      Soames laid the hands down, and bending over kissed his father\'92s\
      forehead. As he was raising himself again, James\'92 eyes bent on\
      him a look which seemed to come from the very depths of what was\
      left within. \'93I\'92m done, my boy,\'94 it seemed to say, \'93take care of\
      them, take care of yourself; take care\'97I leave it all to you.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, Yes,\'94 Soames whispered, \'93yes, yes.\'94\
\
      Behind him the nurse did he knew not what, for his father made a\
      tiny movement of repulsion as if resenting that interference; and\
      almost at once his breathing eased away, became quiet; he lay\
      very still. The strained expression on his face passed, a curious\
      white tranquillity took its place. His eyelids quivered, rested;\
      the whole face rested; at ease. Only by the faint puffing of his\
      lips could they tell that he was breathing. Soames sank back on\
      his chair, and fell to cherishing the foot again. He heard the\
      nurse quietly crying over there by the fire; curious that she, a\
      stranger, should be the only one of them who cried! He heard the\
      quiet lick and flutter of the fire flames. One more old Forsyte\
      going to his long rest\'97wonderful, they were!\'97wonderful how he had\
      held on! His mother and Winifred were leaning forward, hanging on\
      the sight of James\'92 lips. But Soames bent sideways over the feet,\
      warming them both; they gave him comfort, colder and colder\
      though they grew. Suddenly he started up; a sound, a dreadful\
      sound such as he had never heard, was coming from his father\'92s\
      lips, as if an outraged heart had broken with a long moan. What a\
      strong heart, to have uttered that farewell! It ceased. Soames\
      looked into the face. No motion; no breath! Dead! He kissed the\
      brow, turned round and went out of the room. He ran upstairs to\
      the bedroom, his old bedroom, still kept for him; flung himself\
      face down on the bed, and broke into sobs which he stilled with\
      the pillow....\
\
      A little later he went downstairs and passed into the room. James\
      lay alone, wonderfully calm, free from shadow and anxiety, with\
      the gravity on his ravaged face which underlies great age, the\
      worn fine gravity of old coins.\
\
      Soames looked steadily at that face, at the fire, at all the room\
      with windows thrown open to the London night.\
\
      \'93Good-bye!\'94 he whispered, and went out.\
\
\
\
\
      CHAPTER XIV HIS\
\
\
      He had much to see to, that night and all next day. A telegram at\
      breakfast reassured him about Annette, and he only caught the\
      last train back to Reading, with Emily\'92s kiss on his forehead and\
      in his ears her words:\
\
      \'93I don\'92t know what I should have done without you, my dear boy.\'94\
\
      He reached his house at midnight. The weather had changed, was\
      mild again, as though, having finished its work and sent a\
      Forsyte to his last account, it could relax. A second telegram,\
      received at dinner-time, had confirmed the good news of Annette,\
      and, instead of going in, Soames passed down through the garden\
      in the moonlight to his houseboat. He could sleep there quite\
      well. Bitterly tired, he lay down on the sofa in his fur coat and\
      fell asleep. He woke soon after dawn and went on deck. He stood\
      against the rail, looking west where the river swept round in a\
      wide curve under the woods. In Soames, appreciation of natural\
      beauty was curiously like that of his farmer ancestors, a sense\
      of grievance if it wasn\'92t there, sharpened, no doubt, and\
      civilised, by his researches among landscape painting. But dawn\
      has power to fertilise the most matter-of-fact vision, and he was\
      stirred. It was another world from the river he knew, under that\
      remote cool light; a world into which man had not entered, an\
      unreal world, like some strange shore sighted by discovery. Its\
      colour was not the colour of convention, was hardly colour at\
      all; its shapes were brooding yet distinct; its silence stunning;\
      it had no scent. Why it should move him he could not tell, unless\
      it were that he felt so alone in it, bare of all relationship and\
      all possessions. Into such a world his father might be voyaging,\
      for all resemblance it had to the world he had left. And Soames\
      took refuge from it in wondering what painter could have done it\
      justice. The white-grey water was like\'97like the belly of a fish!\
      Was it possible that this world on which he looked was all\
      private property, except the water\'97and even that was tapped! No\
      tree, no shrub, not a blade of grass, not a bird or beast, not\
      even a fish that was not owned. And once on a time all this was\
      jungle and marsh and water, and weird creatures roamed and\
      sported without human cognizance to give them names; rotting\
      luxuriance had rioted where those tall, carefully planted woods\
      came down to the water, and marsh-misted reeds on that far side\
      had covered all the pasture. Well! they had got it under,\
      kennelled it all up, labelled it, and stowed it in lawyers\'92\
      offices. And a good thing too! But once in a way, as now, the\
      ghost of the past came out to haunt and brood and whisper to any\
      human who chanced to be awake: \'93Out of my unowned loneliness you\
      all came, into it some day you will all return.\'94\
\
      And Soames, who felt the chill and the eeriness of that world\'97new\
      to him and so very old: the world, unowned, visiting the scene of\
      its past\'97went down and made himself tea on a spirit-lamp. When he\
      had drunk it, he took out writing materials and wrote two\
      paragraphs:\
\
      \'93On the 20th instant at his residence in Park Lane, James\
      Forsyte, in his ninety-first year. Funeral at noon on the 24th at\
      Highgate. No flowers by request.\'94\
\
      \'93On the 20th instant at The Shelter; Mapledurham, Annette, wife\
      of Soames Forsyte, of a daughter.\'94 And underneath on the\
      blottingpaper he traced the word \'93son.\'94\
\
      It was eight o\'92clock in an ordinary autumn world when he went\
      across to the house. Bushes across the river stood round and\
      bright-coloured out of a milky haze; the wood-smoke went up blue\
      and straight; and his doves cooed, preening their feathers in the\
      sunlight.\
\
      He stole up to his dressing-room, bathed, shaved, put on fresh\
      linen and dark clothes.\
\
      Madame Lamotte was beginning her breakfast when he went down.\
\
      She looked at his clothes, said, \'93Don\'92t tell me!\'94 and pressed his\
      hand. \'93Annette is prettee well. But the doctor say she can never\
      have no more children. You knew that?\'94 Soames nodded. \'93It\'92s a\
      pity. _Mais la petite est adorable. Du caf\'e9?_\'94\
\
      Soames got away from her as soon as he could. She offended\
      him\'97solid, matter-of-fact, quick, clear\'97_French_. He could not\
      bear her vowels, her \'93r\'92s\'94. he resented the way she had looked at\
      him, as if it were his fault that Annette could never bear him a\
      son! His fault! He even resented her cheap adoration of the\
      daughter he had not yet seen.\
\
      Curious how he jibbed away from sight of his wife and child!\
\
      One would have thought he must have rushed up at the first\
      moment. On the contrary, he had a sort of physical shrinking from\
      it\'97fastidious possessor that he was. He was afraid of what\
      Annette was thinking of him, author of her agonies, afraid of the\
      look of the baby, afraid of showing his disappointment with the\
      present and\'97the future.\
\
      He spent an hour walking up and down the drawing-room before he\
      could screw his courage up to mount the stairs and knock on the\
      door of their room.\
\
      Madame Lamotte opened it.\
\
      \'93Ah! At last you come! _Elle vous attend!_\'94 She passed him, and\
      Soames went in with his noiseless step, his jaw firmly set, his\
      eyes furtive.\
\
      Annette was very pale and very pretty lying there. The baby was\
      hidden away somewhere; he could not see it. He went up to the\
      bed, and with sudden emotion bent and kissed her forehead.\
\
      \'93Here you are then, Soames,\'94 she said. \'93I am not so bad now. But\
      I suffered terribly, terribly. I am glad I cannot have any more.\
      Oh! how I suffered!\'94\
\
      Soames stood silent, stroking her hand; words of endearment, of\
      sympathy, absolutely would not come; the thought passed through\
      him: \'93An English girl wouldn\'92t have said that!\'94 At this moment he\
      knew with certainty that he would never be near to her in spirit\
      and in truth, nor she to him. He had collected her\'97that was all!\
      And Jolyon\'92s words came rushing into his mind: \'93I should imagine\
      you will be glad to have your neck out of chancery.\'94 Well, he had\
      got it out! Had he got it in again?\
\
      \'93We must feed you up,\'94 he said, \'93you\'92ll soon be strong.\'94\
\
      \'93Don\'92t you want to see baby, Soames? She is asleep.\'94\
\
      \'93Of course,\'94 said Soames, \'93very much.\'94\
\
      He passed round the foot of the bed to the other side and stood\
      staring. For the first moment what he saw was much what he had\
      expected to see\'97a baby. But as he stared and the baby breathed\
      and made little sleeping movements with its tiny features, it\
      seemed to assume an individual shape, grew to be like a picture,\
      a thing he would know again; not repulsive, strangely bud-like\
      and touching. It had dark hair. He touched it with his finger, he\
      wanted to see its eyes. They opened, they were dark\'97whether blue\
      or brown he could not tell. The eyes winked, stared, they had a\
      sort of sleepy depth in them. And suddenly his heart felt queer,\
      warm, as if elated.\
\
      \'93_Ma petite fleur!_\'94 Annette said softly.\
\
      \'93Fleur,\'94 repeated Soames: \'93Fleur! we\'92ll call her that.\'94\
\
      The sense of triumph and renewed possession swelled within him.\
\
      By God! this\'97this thing was his! By God! this\'97this thing was\
      _his!_\
\
\
\
      titlepage3 (37K)\
\
\
\
      frontis3 (120K)\
\
\
\
\
      THE FORSYTE SAGA\'97VOLUME III.\
\
      By John Galsworthy\
\
\
\
\
      AWAKENING\
\
\
      TO CHARLES SCRIBNER\
\
\
\
\
      AWAKENING\
\
      Through the massive skylight illuminating the hall at Robin Hill,\
      the July sunlight at five o'clock fell just where the broad\
      stairway turned; and in that radiant streak little Jon Forsyte\
      stood, blue-linen-suited. His hair was shining, and his eyes,\
      from beneath a frown, for he was considering how to go\
      downstairs, this last of innumerable times, before the car\
      brought his father and mother home. Four at a time, and five at\
      the bottom? Stale! Down the banisters? But in which fashion? On\
      his face, feet foremost? Very stale. On his stomach, sideways?\
      Paltry! On his back, with his arms stretched down on both sides?\
      Forbidden! Or on his face, head foremost, in a manner unknown as\
      yet to any but himself? Such was the cause of the frown on the\
      illuminated face of little Jon....\
\
      In that Summer of 1909 the simple souls who even then desired to\
      simplify the English tongue, had, of course, no cognizance of\
      little Jon, or they would have claimed him for a disciple. But\
      one can be too simple in this life, for his real name was Jolyon,\
      and his living father and dead half-brother had usurped of old\
      the other shortenings, Jo and Jolly. As a fact little Jon had\
      done his best to conform to convention and spell himself first\
      Jhon, then John; not till his father had explained the sheer\
      necessity, had he spelled his name Jon.\
\
      Up till now that father had possessed what was left of his heart\
      by the groom, Bob, who played the concertina, and his nurse \'93Da,\'94\
      who wore the violet dress on Sundays, and enjoyed the name of\
      Spraggins in that private life lived at odd moments even by\
      domestic servants. His mother had only appeared to him, as it\
      were in dreams, smelling delicious, smoothing his forehead just\
      before he fell asleep, and sometimes docking his hair, of a\
      golden brown colour. When he cut his head open against the\
      nursery fender she was there to be bled over; and when he had\
      nightmare she would sit on his bed and cuddle his head against\
      her neck. She was precious but remote, because \'93Da\'94 was so near,\
      and there is hardly room for more than one woman at a time in a\
      man's heart. With his father, too, of course, he had special\
      bonds of union; for little Jon also meant to be a painter when he\
      grew up\'97with the one small difference, that his father painted\
      pictures, and little Jon intended to paint ceilings and walls,\
      standing on a board between two step-ladders, in a dirty-white\
      apron, and a lovely smell of whitewash. His father also took him\
      riding in Richmond Park, on his pony, Mouse, so-called because it\
      was so-coloured.\
\
      Little Jon had been born with a silver spoon in a mouth which was\
      rather curly and large. He had never heard his father or his\
      mother speak in an angry voice, either to each other, himself, or\
      anybody else; the groom, Bob, Cook, Jane, Bella and the other\
      servants, even \'93Da,\'94 who alone restrained him in his courses, had\
      special voices when they talked to him. He was therefore of\
      opinion that the world was a place of perfect and perpetual\
      gentility and freedom.\
\
      A child of 1901, he had come to consciousness when his country,\
      just over that bad attack of scarlet fever, the Boer War, was\
      preparing for the Liberal revival of 1906. Coercion was\
      unpopular, parents had exalted notions of giving their offspring\
      a good time. They spoiled their rods, spared their children, and\
      anticipated the results with enthusiasm. In choosing, moreover,\
      for his father an amiable man of fifty-two, who had already lost\
      an only son, and for his mother a woman of thirty-eight, whose\
      first and only child he was, little Jon had done well and wisely.\
      What had saved him from becoming a cross between a lap dog and a\
      little prig, had been his father's adoration of his mother, for\
      even little Jon could see that she was not merely just his\
      mother, and that he played second fiddle to her in his father's\
      heart: What he played in his mother's heart he knew not yet. As\
      for \'93Auntie\'94 June, his half-sister (but so old that she had grown\
      out of the relationship) she loved him, of course, but was too\
      sudden. His devoted \'93Da,\'94 too, had a Spartan touch. His bath was\
      cold and his knees were bare; he was not encouraged to be sorry\
      for himself. As to the vexed question of his education, little\
      Jon shared the theory of those who considered that children\
      should not be forced. He rather liked the Mademoiselle who came\
      for two hours every morning to teach him her language, together\
      with history, geography and sums; nor were the piano lessons\
      which his mother gave him disagreeable, for she had a way of\
      luring him from tune to tune, never making him practise one which\
      did not give him pleasure, so that he remained eager to convert\
      ten thumbs into eight fingers. Under his father he learned to\
      draw pleasure-pigs and other animals. He was not a highly\
      educated little boy. Yet, on the whole, the silver spoon stayed\
      in his mouth without spoiling it, though \'93Da\'94 sometimes said that\
      other children would do him a \'93world of good.\'94\
\
      It was a disillusionment, then, when at the age of nearly seven\
      she held him down on his back, because he wanted to do something\
      of which she did not approve. This first interference with the\
      free individualism of a Forsyte drove him almost frantic. There\
      was something appalling in the utter helplessness of that\
      position, and the uncertainty as to whether it would ever come to\
      an end. Suppose she never let him get up any more! He suffered\
      torture at the top of his voice for fifty seconds. Worse than\
      anything was his perception that \'93Da\'94 had taken all that time to\
      realise the agony of fear he was enduring. Thus, dreadfully, was\
      revealed to him the lack of imagination in the human being.\
\
      When he was let up he remained convinced that \'93Da\'94 had done a\
      dreadful thing. Though he did not wish to bear witness against\
      her, he had been compelled, by fear of repetition, to seek his\
      mother and say: \'93Mum, don't let 'Da' hold me down on my back\
      again.\'94\
\
      His mother, her hands held up over her head, and in them two\
      plaits of hair\'97\'93couleur de feuille morte,\'94 as little Jon had not\
      yet learned to call it\'97had looked at him with eyes like little\
      bits of his brown velvet tunic, and answered:\
\
      \'93No, darling, I won't.\'94\
\
      She, being in the nature of a goddess, little Jon was satisfied;\
      especially when, from under the dining-table at breakfast, where\
      he happened to be waiting for a mushroom, he had overheard her\
      say to his father:\
\
      \'93Then, will you tell 'Da,' dear, or shall I? She's so devoted to\
      him\'94; and his father's answer:\
\
      \'93Well, she mustn't show it that way. I know exactly what it feels\
      like to be held down on one's back. No Forsyte can stand it for a\
      minute.\'94\
\
      Conscious that they did not know him to be under the table,\
      little Jon was visited by the quite new feeling of embarrassment,\
      and stayed where he was, ravaged by desire for the mushroom.\
\
      Such had been his first dip into the dark abysses of existence.\
      Nothing much had been revealed to him after that, till one day,\
      having gone down to the cow-house for his drink of milk fresh\
      from the cow, after Garratt had finished milking, he had seen\
      Clover's calf, dead. Inconsolable, and followed by an upset\
      Garratt, he had sought \'93Da\'94; but suddenly aware that she was not\
      the person he wanted, had rushed away to find his father, and had\
      run into the arms of his mother.\
\
      \'93Clover's calf's dead! Oh! Oh! It looked so soft!\'94\
\
      His mother's clasp, and her:\
\
      \'93Yes, darling, there, there!\'94 had stayed his sobbing. But if\
      Clover's calf could die, anything could\'97not only bees, flies,\
      beetles and chickens\'97and look soft like that! This was\
      appalling\'97and soon forgotten!\
\
      The next thing had been to sit on a bumble bee, a poignant\
      experience, which his mother had understood much better than\
      \'93Da\'94; and nothing of vital importance had happened after that\
      till the year turned; when, following a day of utter\
      wretchedness, he had enjoyed a disease composed of little spots,\
      bed, honey in a spoon, and many Tangerine oranges. It was then\
      that the world had flowered. To \'93Auntie\'94 June he owed that\
      flowering, for no sooner was he a little lame duck than she came\
      rushing down from London, bringing with her the books which had\
      nurtured her own Berserker spirit, born in the noted year of\
      1869. Aged, and of many colours, they were stored with the most\
      formidable happenings. Of these she read to little Jon, till he\
      was allowed to read to himself; whereupon she whisked back to\
      London and left them with him in a heap. Those books cooked his\
      fancy, till he thought and dreamed of nothing but midshipmen and\
      dhows, pirates, rafts, sandal-wood traders, iron horses, sharks,\
      battles, Tartars, Red Indians, balloons, North Poles and other\
      extravagant delights. The moment he was suffered to get up, he\
      rigged his bed fore and aft, and set out from it in a narrow bath\
      across green seas of carpet, to a rock, which he climbed by means\
      of its mahogany drawer knobs, to sweep the horizon with his\
      drinking tumbler screwed to his eye, in search of rescuing sails.\
      He made a daily raft out of the towel stand, the tea tray, and\
      his pillows. He saved the juice from his French plums, bottled it\
      in an empty medicine bottle, and provisioned the raft with the\
      rum that it became; also with pemmican made out of little\
      saved-up bits of chicken sat on and dried at the fire; and with\
      lime juice against scurvy, extracted from the peel of his oranges\
      and a little economised juice. He made a North Pole one morning\
      from the whole of his bedclothes except the bolster, and reached\
      it in a birch-bark canoe (in private life the fender), after a\
      terrible encounter with a polar bear fashioned from the bolster\
      and four skittles dressed up in \'93Da's\'94 nightgown. After that, his\
      father, seeking to steady his imagination, brought him Ivanhoe,\
      Bevis, a book about King Arthur, and Tom Brown's Schooldays. He\
      read the first, and for three days built, defended and stormed\
      Front de Boeuf's castle, taking every part in the piece except\
      those of Rebecca and Rowena; with piercing cries of: \'93En avant,\
      de Bracy!\'94 and similar utterances. After reading the book about\
      King Arthur he became almost exclusively Sir Lamorac de Galis,\
      because, though there was very little about him, he preferred his\
      name to that of any other knight; and he rode his old\
      rocking-horse to death, armed with a long bamboo. Bevis he found\
      tame; besides, it required woods and animals, of which he had\
      none in his nursery, except his two cats, Fitz and Puck Forsyte,\
      who permitted no liberties. For Tom Brown he was as yet too\
      young. There was relief in the house when, after the fourth week,\
      he was permitted to go down and out.\
\
      The month being March the trees were exceptionally like the masts\
      of ships, and for little Jon that was a wonderful Spring,\
      extremely hard on his knees, suits, and the patience of \'93Da,\'94 who\
      had the washing and reparation of his clothes. Every morning the\
      moment his breakfast was over, he could be viewed by his mother\
      and father, whose windows looked out that way, coming from the\
      study, crossing the terrace, climbing the old oak tree, his face\
      resolute and his hair bright. He began the day thus because there\
      was not time to go far afield before his lessons. The old tree's\
      variety never staled; it had mainmast, foremast, top-gallant\
      mast, and he could always come down by the halyards\'97or ropes of\
      the swing. After his lessons, completed by eleven, he would go to\
      the kitchen for a thin piece of cheese, a biscuit and two French\
      plums\'97provision enough for a jolly-boat at least\'97and eat it in\
      some imaginative way; then, armed to the teeth with gun, pistols,\
      and sword, he would begin the serious climbing of the morning,\
      encountering by the way innumerable slavers, Indians, pirates,\
      leopards, and bears. He was seldom seen at that hour of the day\
      without a cutlass in his teeth (like Dick Needham) amid the rapid\
      explosion of copper caps. And many were the gardeners he brought\
      down with yellow peas shot out of his little gun. He lived a life\
      of the most violent action.\
\
      \'93Jon,\'94 said his father to his mother, under the oak tree, \'93is\
      terrible. I'm afraid he's going to turn out a sailor, or\
      something hopeless. Do you see any sign of his appreciating\
      beauty?\'94\
\
      \'93Not the faintest.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, thank heaven he's no turn for wheels or engines! I can\
      bear anything but that. But I wish he'd take more interest in\
      Nature.\'94\
\
      \'93He's imaginative, Jolyon.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, in a sanguinary way. Does he love anyone just now?\'94\
\
      \'93No; only everyone. There never was anyone born more loving or\
      more lovable than Jon.\'94\
\
      \'93Being your boy, Irene.\'94\
\
      At this moment little Jon, lying along a branch high above them,\
      brought them down with two peas; but that fragment of talk\
      lodged, thick, in his small gizzard. Loving, lovable,\
      imaginative, sanguinary!\
\
      The leaves also were thick by now, and it was time for his\
      birthday, which, occurring every year on the twelfth of May, was\
      always memorable for his chosen dinner of sweetbread, mushrooms,\
      macaroons, and ginger beer.\
\
      Between that eighth birthday, however, and the afternoon when he\
      stood in the July radiance at the turning of the stairway,\
      several important things had happened.\
\
      \'93Da,\'94 worn out by washing his knees, or moved by that mysterious\
      instinct which forces even nurses to desert their nurslings, left\
      the very day after his birthday in floods of tears \'93to be\
      married\'94\'97of all things\'97\'93to a man.\'94 Little Jon, from whom it had\
      been kept, was inconsolable for an afternoon. It ought not to\
      have been kept from him! Two large boxes of soldiers and some\
      artillery, together with The Young Buglers, which had been among\
      his birthday presents, cooperated with his grief in a sort of\
      conversion, and instead of seeking adventures in person and\
      risking his own life, he began to play imaginative games, in\
      which he risked the lives of countless tin soldiers, marbles,\
      stones and beans. Of these forms of \'93chair a canon\'94 he made\
      collections, and, using them alternately, fought the Peninsular,\
      the Seven Years, the Thirty Years, and other wars, about which he\
      had been reading of late in a big History of Europe which had\
      been his grandfather's. He altered them to suit his genius, and\
      fought them all over the floor in his day nursery, so that nobody\
      could come in, for fearing of disturbing Gustavus Adolphus, King\
      of Sweden, or treading on an army of Austrians. Because of the\
      sound of the word he was passionately addicted to the Austrians,\
      and finding there were so few battles in which they were\
      successful he had to invent them in his games. His favourite\
      generals were Prince Eugene, the Archduke Charles and\
      Wallenstein. Tilly and Mack (\'93music-hall turns\'94 he heard his\
      father call them one day, whatever that might mean) one really\
      could not love very much, Austrian though they were. For euphonic\
      reasons, too, he doted on Turenne.\
\
      This phase, which caused his parents anxiety, because it kept him\
      indoors when he ought to have been out, lasted through May and\
      half of June, till his father killed it by bringing home to him\
      Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn. When he read those books\
      something happened in him, and he went out of doors again in\
      passionate quest of a river. There being none on the premises at\
      Robin Hill, he had to make one out of the pond, which fortunately\
      had water lilies, dragonflies, gnats, bullrushes, and three small\
      willow trees. On this pond, after his father and Garratt had\
      ascertained by sounding that it had a reliable bottom and was\
      nowhere more than two feet deep, he was allowed a little\
      collapsible canoe, in which he spent hours and hours paddling,\
      and lying down out of sight of Indian Joe and other enemies. On\
      the shore of the pond, too, he built himself a wigwam about four\
      feet square, of old biscuit tins, roofed in by boughs. In this he\
      would make little fires, and cook the birds he had not shot with\
      his gun, hunting in the coppice and fields, or the fish he did\
      not catch in the pond because there were none. This occupied the\
      rest of June and that July, when his father and mother were away\
      in Ireland. He led a lonely life of \'93make believe\'94 during those\
      five weeks of summer weather, with gun, wigwam, water and canoe;\
      and, however hard his active little brain tried to keep the sense\
      of beauty away, she did creep in on him for a second now and\
      then, perching on the wing of a dragon-fly, glistening on the\
      water lilies, or brushing his eyes with her blue as he lay on his\
      back in ambush.\
\
      \'93Auntie\'94 June, who had been left in charge, had a \'93grown-up\'94 in\
      the house, with a cough and a large piece of putty which he was\
      making into a face; so she hardly ever came down to see him in\
      the pond. Once, however, she brought with her two other\
      \'93grown-ups.\'94 Little Jon, who happened to have painted his naked\
      self bright blue and yellow in stripes out of his father's\
      water-colour box, and put some duck's feathers in his hair, saw\
      them coming, and\'97ambushed himself among the willows. As he had\
      foreseen, they came at once to his wigwam and knelt down to look\
      inside, so that with a blood-curdling yell he was able to take\
      the scalps of \'93Auntie\'94 June and the woman \'93grown-up\'94 in an almost\
      complete manner before they kissed him. The names of the two\
      grown-ups were \'93Auntie\'94 Holly and \'93Uncle\'94 Val, who had a brown\
      face and a little limp, and laughed at him terribly. He took a\
      fancy to \'93Auntie\'94 Holly, who seemed to be a sister too; but they\
      both went away the same afternoon and he did not see them again.\
      Three days before his father and mother were to come home\
      \'93Auntie\'94 June also went off in a great hurry, taking the\
      \'93grown-up\'94 who coughed and his piece of putty; and Mademoiselle\
      said: \'93Poor man, he was veree ill. I forbid you to go into his\
      room, Jon.\'94 Little Jon, who rarely did things merely because he\
      was told not to, refrained from going, though he was bored and\
      lonely. In truth the day of the pond was past, and he was filled\
      to the brim of his soul with restlessness and the want of\
      something\'97not a tree, not a gun\'97something soft. Those last two\
      days had seemed months in spite of Cast Up by the Sea, wherein he\
      was reading about Mother Lee and her terrible wrecking bonfire.\
      He had gone up and down the stairs perhaps a hundred times in\
      those two days, and often from the day nursery, where he slept\
      now, had stolen into his mother's room, looked at everything,\
      without touching, and on into the dressing-room; and standing on\
      one leg beside the bath, like Slingsby, had whispered:\
\
      \'93Ho, ho, ho! Dog my cats!\'94 mysteriously, to bring luck. Then,\
      stealing back, he had opened his mother's wardrobe, and taken a\
      long sniff which seemed to bring him nearer to\'97he didn't know\
      what.\
\
      He had done this just before he stood in the streak of sunlight,\
      debating in which of the several ways he should slide down the\
      banisters. They all seemed silly, and in a sudden languor he\
      began descending the steps one by one. During that descent he\
      could remember his father quite distinctly\'97the short grey beard,\
      the deep eyes twinkling, the furrow between them, the funny\
      smile, the thin figure which always seemed so tall to little Jon;\
      but his mother he couldn't see. All that represented her was\
      something swaying with two dark eyes looking back at him; and the\
      scent of her wardrobe.\
\
      Bella was in the hall, drawing aside the big curtains, and\
      opening the front door. Little Jon said, wheedling,\
\
      \'93Bella!\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, Master Jon.\'94\
\
      \'93Do let's have tea under the oak tree when they come; I know\
      they'd like it best.\'94\
\
      \'93You mean you'd like it best.\'94\
\
      Little Jon considered.\
\
      \'93No, they would, to please me.\'94\
\
      Bella smiled. \'93Very well, I'll take it out if you'll stay quiet\
      here and not get into mischief before they come.\'94\
\
      Little Jon sat down on the bottom step, and nodded. Bella came\
      close, and looked him over.\
\
      \'93Get up!\'94 she said.\
\
      Little Jon got up. She scrutinized him behind; he was not green,\
      and his knees seemed clean.\
\
      \'93All right!\'94 she said. \'93My! Aren't you brown? Give me a kiss!\'94\
\
      And little Jon received a peck on his hair.\
\
      \'93What jam?\'94 he asked. \'93I'm so tired of waiting.\'94\
\
      \'93Gooseberry and strawberry.\'94\
\
      Num! They were his favourites!\
\
      When she was gone he sat still for quite a minute. It was quiet\
      in the big hall open to its East end so that he could see one of\
      his trees, a brig sailing very slowly across the upper lawn. In\
      the outer hall shadows were slanting from the pillars. Little Jon\
      got up, jumped one of them, and walked round the clump of iris\
      plants which filled the pool of grey-white marble in the centre.\
      The flowers were pretty, but only smelled a very little. He stood\
      in the open doorway and looked out. Suppose!\'97suppose they didn't\
      come! He had waited so long that he felt he could not bear that,\
      and his attention slid at once from such finality to the dust\
      motes in the bluish sunlight coming in: Thrusting his hand up, he\
      tried to catch some. Bella ought to have dusted that piece of\
      air! But perhaps they weren't dust\'97only what sunlight was made\
      of, and he looked to see whether the sunlight out of doors was\
      the same. It was not. He had said he would stay quiet in the\
      hall, but he simply couldn't any more; and crossing the gravel of\
      the drive he lay down on the grass beyond. Pulling six daisies he\
      named them carefully, Sir Lamorac, Sir Tristram, Sir Lancelot,\
      Sir Palimedes, Sir Bors, Sir Gawain, and fought them in couples\
      till only Sir Lamorac, whom he had selected for a specially stout\
      stalk, had his head on, and even he, after three encounters,\
      looked worn and waggly. A beetle was moving slowly in the grass,\
      which almost wanted cutting. Every blade was a small tree, round\
      whose trunk the beetle had to glide. Little Jon stretched out Sir\
      Lamorac, feet foremost, and stirred the creature up. It scuttled\
      painfully. Little Jon laughed, lost interest, and sighed. His\
      heart felt empty. He turned over and lay on his back. There was a\
      scent of honey from the lime trees in flower, and in the sky the\
      blue was beautiful, with a few white clouds which looked and\
      perhaps tasted like lemon ice. He could hear Bob playing: \'93Way\
      down upon de Suwannee ribber\'94 on his concertina, and it made him\
      nice and sad. He turned over again and put his ear to the\
      ground\'97Indians could hear things coming ever so far\'97but he could\
      hear nothing\'97only the concertina! And almost instantly he did\
      hear a grinding sound, a faint toot. Yes! it was a\
      car\'97coming\'97coming! Up he jumped. Should he wait in the porch, or\
      rush upstairs, and as they came in, shout: \'93Look!\'94 and slide\
      slowly down the banisters, head foremost? Should he? The car\
      turned in at the drive. It was too late! And he only waited,\
      jumping up and down in his excitement. The car came quickly,\
      whirred, and stopped. His father got out, exactly like life. He\
      bent down and little Jon bobbed up\'97they bumped. His father said,\
\
      \'93Bless us! Well, old man, you are brown!\'94 Just as he would; and\
      the sense of expectation\'97of something wanted\'97bubbled\
      unextinguished in little Jon. Then, with a long, shy look he saw\
      his mother, in a blue dress, with a blue motor scarf over her cap\
      and hair, smiling. He jumped as high as ever he could, twined his\
      legs behind her back, and hugged. He heard her gasp, and felt her\
      hugging back. His eyes, very dark blue just then, looked into\
      hers, very dark brown, till her lips closed on his eyebrow, and,\
      squeezing with all his might, he heard her creak and laugh, and\
      say:\
\
      \'93You are strong, Jon!\'94\
\
      He slid down at that, and rushed into the hall, dragging her by\
      the hand.\
\
      While he was eating his jam beneath the oak tree, he noticed\
      things about his mother that he had never seemed to see before,\
      her cheeks for instance were creamy, there were silver threads in\
      her dark goldy hair, her throat had no knob in it like Bella's,\
      and she went in and out softly. He noticed, too, some little\
      lines running away from the corners of her eyes, and a nice\
      darkness under them. She was ever so beautiful, more beautiful\
      than \'93Da\'94 or Mademoiselle, or \'93Auntie\'94 June or even \'93Auntie\'94\
      Holly, to whom he had taken a fancy; even more beautiful than\
      Bella, who had pink cheeks and came out too suddenly in places.\
      This new beautifulness of his mother had a kind of particular\
      importance, and he ate less than he had expected to.\
\
      When tea was over his father wanted him to walk round the\
      gardens. He had a long conversation with his father about things\
      in general, avoiding his private life\'97Sir Lamorac, the Austrians,\
      and the emptiness he had felt these last three days, now so\
      suddenly filled up. His father told him of a place called\
      Glensofantrim, where he and his mother had been; and of the\
      little people who came out of the ground there when it was very\
      quiet. Little Jon came to a halt, with his heels apart.\
\
      \'93Do you really believe they do, Daddy?\'94 \'93No, Jon, but I thought\
      you might.\'94\
\
      \'93Why?\'94\
\
      \'93You're younger than I; and they're fairies.\'94 Little Jon squared\
      the dimple in his chin.\
\
      \'93I don't believe in fairies. I never see any.\'94 \'93Ha!\'94 said his\
      father.\
\
      \'93Does Mum?\'94\
\
      His father smiled his funny smile.\
\
      \'93No; she only sees Pan.\'94\
\
      \'93What's Pan?\'94\
\
      \'93The Goaty God who skips about in wild and beautiful places.\'94\
\
      \'93Was he in Glensofantrim?\'94\
\
      \'93Mum said so.\'94\
\
      Little Jon took his heels up, and led on.\
\
      \'93Did you see him?\'94\
\
      \'93No; I only saw Venus Anadyomene.\'94\
\
      Little Jon reflected; Venus was in his book about the Greeks and\
      Trojans. Then Anna was her Christian and Dyomene her surname?\
\
      But it appeared, on inquiry, that it was one word, which meant\
      rising from the foam.\
\
      \'93Did she rise from the foam in Glensofantrim?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes; every day.\'94\
\
      \'93What is she like, Daddy?\'94\
\
      \'93Like Mum.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! Then she must be...\'94 but he stopped at that, rushed at a\
      wall, scrambled up, and promptly scrambled down again. The\
      discovery that his mother was beautiful was one which he felt\
      must absolutely be kept to himself. His father's cigar, however,\
      took so long to smoke, that at last he was compelled to say:\
\
      \'93I want to see what Mum's brought home. Do you mind, Daddy?\'94\
\
      He pitched the motive low, to absolve him from unmanliness, and\
      was a little disconcerted when his father looked at him right\
      through, heaved an important sigh, and answered:\
\
      \'93All right, old man, you go and love her.\'94\
\
      He went, with a pretence of slowness, and then rushed, to make\
      up. He entered her bedroom from his own, the door being open. She\
      was still kneeling before a trunk, and he stood close to her,\
      quite still.\
\
      She knelt up straight, and said:\
\
      \'93Well, Jon?\'94\
\
      \'93I thought I'd just come and see.\'94\
\
      Having given and received another hug, he mounted the\
      window-seat, and tucking his legs up under him watched her\
      unpack. He derived a pleasure from the operation such as he had\
      not yet known, partly because she was taking out things which\
      looked suspicious, and partly because he liked to look at her.\
      She moved differently from anybody else, especially from Bella;\
      she was certainly the refinedest-looking person he had ever seen.\
      She finished the trunk at last, and knelt down in front of him.\
\
      \'93Have you missed us, Jon?\'94\
\
      Little Jon nodded, and having thus admitted his feelings,\
      continued to nod.\
\
      \'93But you had 'Auntie' June?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! she had a man with a cough.\'94\
\
      His mother's face changed, and looked almost angry. He added\
      hastily:\
\
      \'93He was a poor man, Mum; he coughed awfully; I\'97I liked him.\'94\
\
      His mother put her hands behind his waist.\
\
      \'93You like everybody, Jon?\'94\
\
      Little Jon considered.\
\
      \'93Up to a point,\'94 he said: \'93Auntie June took me to church one\
      Sunday.\'94\
\
      \'93To church? Oh!\'94\
\
      \'93She wanted to see how it would affect me.\'94 \'93And did it?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes. I came over all funny, so she took me home again very\
      quick. I wasn't sick after all. I went to bed and had hot brandy\
      and water, and read The Boys of Beechwood. It was scrumptious.\'94\
\
      His mother bit her lip.\
\
      \'93When was that?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! about\'97a long time ago\'97I wanted her to take me again, but she\
      wouldn't. You and Daddy never go to church, do you?\'94\
\
      \'93No, we don't.\'94\
\
      \'93Why don't you?\'94\
\
      His mother smiled.\
\
      \'93Well, dear, we both of us went when we were little. Perhaps we\
      went when we were too little.\'94\
\
      \'93I see,\'94 said little Jon, \'93it's dangerous.\'94\
\
      \'93You shall judge for yourself about all those things as you grow\
      up.\'94\
\
      Little Jon replied in a calculating manner:\
\
      \'93I don't want to grow up, much. I don't want to go to school.\'94 A\
      sudden overwhelming desire to say something more, to say what he\
      really felt, turned him red. \'93I\'97I want to stay with you, and be\
      your lover, Mum.\'94\
\
      Then with an instinct to improve the situation, he added quickly\
      \'93I don't want to go to bed to-night, either. I'm simply tired of\
      going to bed, every night.\'94\
\
      \'93Have you had any more nightmares?\'94\
\
      \'93Only about one. May I leave the door open into your room\
      to-night, Mum?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, just a little.\'94 Little Jon heaved a sigh of satisfaction.\
\
      \'93What did you see in Glensofantrim?\'94\
\
      \'93Nothing but beauty, darling.\'94\
\
      \'93What exactly is beauty?\'94\
\
      \'93What exactly is\'97Oh! Jon, that's a poser.\'94\
\
      \'93Can I see it, for instance?\'94 His mother got up, and sat beside\
      him. \'93You do, every day. The sky is beautiful, the stars, and\
      moonlit nights, and then the birds, the flowers, the\
      trees\'97they're all beautiful. Look out of the window\'97there's\
      beauty for you, Jon.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! yes, that's the view. Is that all?\'94\
\
      \'93All? no. The sea is wonderfully beautiful, and the waves, with\
      their foam flying back.\'94\
\
      \'93Did you rise from it every day, Mum?\'94\
\
      His mother smiled. \'93Well, we bathed.\'94\
\
      Little Jon suddenly reached out and caught her neck in his hands.\
\
      \'93I know,\'94 he said mysteriously, \'93you're it, really, and all the\
      rest is make-believe.\'94\
\
      She sighed, laughed, said: \'93Oh! Jon!\'94\
\
      Little Jon said critically:\
\
      \'93Do you think Bella beautiful, for instance? I hardly do.\'94\
\
      \'93Bella is young; that's something.\'94\
\
      \'93But you look younger, Mum. If you bump against Bella she hurts.\'94\
\
      \'93I don't believe 'Da' was beautiful, when I come to think of it;\
      and Mademoiselle's almost ugly.\'94\
\
      \'93Mademoiselle has a very nice face.\'94 \'93Oh! yes; nice. I love your\
      little rays, Mum.\'94\
\
      \'93Rays?\'94\
\
      Little Jon put his finger to the outer corner of her eye.\
\
      \'93Oh! Those? But they're a sign of age.\'94\
\
      \'93They come when you smile.\'94\
\
      \'93But they usen't to.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! well, I like them. Do you love me, Mum?\'94\
\
      \'93I do\'97I do love you, darling.\'94\
\
      \'93Ever so?\'94\
\
      \'93Ever so!\'94\
\
      \'93More than I thought you did?\'94\
\
      \'93Much\'97much more.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, so do I; so that makes it even.\'94\
\
      Conscious that he had never in his life so given himself away, he\
      felt a sudden reaction to the manliness of Sir Lamorac, Dick\
      Needham, Huck Finn, and other heroes.\
\
      \'93Shall I show you a thing or two?\'94 he said; and slipping out of\
      her arms, he stood on his head. Then, fired by her obvious\
      admiration, he mounted the bed, and threw himself head foremost\
      from his feet on to his back, without touching anything with his\
      hands. He did this several times.\
\
      That evening, having inspected what they had brought, he stayed\
      up to dinner, sitting between them at the little round table they\
      used when they were alone. He was extremely excited. His mother\
      wore a French-grey dress, with creamy lace made out of little\
      scriggly roses, round her neck, which was browner than the lace.\
      He kept looking at her, till at last his father's funny smile\
      made him suddenly attentive to his slice of pineapple. It was\
      later than he had ever stayed up, when he went to bed. His mother\
      went up with him, and he undressed very slowly so as to keep her\
      there. When at last he had nothing on but his pyjamas, he said:\
\
      \'93Promise you won't go while I say my prayers!\'94\
\
      \'93I promise.\'94\
\
      Kneeling down and plunging his face into the bed, little Jon\
      hurried up, under his breath, opening one eye now and then, to\
      see her standing perfectly still with a smile on her face. \'93Our\
      Father\'94\'97so went his last prayer, \'93which art in heaven, hallowed\
      be thy Mum, thy Kingdom Mum\'97on Earth as it is in heaven, give us\
      this day our daily Mum and forgive us our trespasses on earth as\
      it is in heaven and trespass against us, for thine is the evil\
      the power and the glory for ever and ever. Amum! Look out!\'94 He\
      sprang, and for a long minute remained in her arms. Once in bed,\
      he continued to hold her hand.\
\
      \'93You won't shut the door any more than that, will you? Are you\
      going to be long, Mum?\'94\
\
      \'93I must go down and play to Daddy.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! well, I shall hear you.\'94\
\
      \'93I hope not; you must go to sleep.\'94\
\
      \'93I can sleep any night.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, this is just a night like any other.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! no\'97it's extra special.\'94\
\
      \'93On extra special nights one always sleeps soundest.\'94\
\
      \'93But if I go to sleep, Mum, I shan't hear you come up.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, when I do, I'll come in and give you a kiss, then if\
      you're awake you'll know, and if you're not you'll still know\
      you've had one.\'94\
\
      Little Jon sighed, \'93All right!\'94 he said: \'93I suppose I must put up\
      with that. Mum?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes?\'94\
\
      \'93What was her name that Daddy believes in? Venus Anna Diomedes?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! my angel! Anadyomene.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes! but I like my name for you much better.\'94\
\
      \'93What is yours, Jon?\'94\
\
      Little Jon answered shyly:\
\
      \'93Guinevere! it's out of the Round Table\'97I've only just thought of\
      it, only of course her hair was down.\'94\
\
      His mother's eyes, looking past him, seemed to float.\
\
      \'93You won't forget to come, Mum?\'94\
\
      \'93Not if you'll go to sleep.\'94\
\
      \'93That's a bargain, then.\'94 And little Jon screwed up his eyes.\
\
      He felt her lips on his forehead, heard her footsteps; opened his\
      eyes to see her gliding through the doorway, and, sighing,\
      screwed them up again.\
\
      Then Time began.\
\
      For some ten minutes of it he tried loyally to sleep, counting a\
      great number of thistles in a row, \'93Da's\'94 old recipe for bringing\
      slumber. He seemed to have been hours counting. It must, he\
      thought, be nearly time for her to come up now. He threw the\
      bedclothes back. \'93I'm hot!\'94 he said, and his voice sounded funny\
      in the darkness, like someone else's. Why didn't she come? He sat\
      up. He must look! He got out of bed, went to the window and\
      pulled the curtain a slice aside. It wasn't dark, but he couldn't\
      tell whether because of daylight or the moon, which was very big.\
      It had a funny, wicked face, as if laughing at him, and he did\
      not want to look at it. Then, remembering that his mother had\
      said moonlit nights were beautiful, he continued to stare out in\
      a general way. The trees threw thick shadows, the lawn looked\
      like spilt milk, and a long, long way he could see; oh! very far;\
      right over the world, and it all looked different and swimmy.\
      There was a lovely smell, too, in his open window.\
\
      'I wish I had a dove like Noah!' he thought.\
\
      \'93The moony moon was round and bright, It shone and shone and made\
      it light.\'94\
\
      After that rhyme, which came into his head all at once, he became\
      conscious of music, very soft-lovely! Mum playing! He bethought\
      himself of a macaroon he had, laid up in his chest of drawers,\
      and, getting it, came back to the window. He leaned out, now\
      munching, now holding his jaws to hear the music better. \'93Da\'94\
      used to say that angels played on harps in heaven; but it wasn't\
      half so lovely as Mum playing in the moony night, with him eating\
      a macaroon. A cockchafer buzzed by, a moth flew in his face, the\
      music stopped, and little Jon drew his head in. She must be\
      coming! He didn't want to be found awake. He got back into bed\
      and pulled the clothes nearly over his head; but he had left a\
      streak of moonlight coming in. It fell across the floor, near the\
      foot of the bed, and he watched it moving ever so slowly towards\
      him, as if it were alive. The music began again, but he could\
      only just hear it now; sleepy music,\
      pretty\'97sleepy\'97music\'97sleepy\'97slee.....\
\
      And time slipped by, the music rose, fell, ceased; the moonbeam\
      crept towards his face. Little Jon turned in his sleep till he\
      lay on his back, with one brown fist still grasping the\
      bedclothes. The corners of his eyes twitched\'97he had begun to\
      dream. He dreamed he was drinking milk out of a pan that was the\
      moon, opposite a great black cat which watched him with a funny\
      smile like his father's. He heard it whisper: \'93Don't drink too\
      much!\'94 It was the cat's milk, of course, and he put out his hand\
      amicably to stroke the creature; but it was no longer there; the\
      pan had become a bed, in which he was lying, and when he tried to\
      get out he couldn't find the edge; he couldn't find\
      it\'97he\'97he\'97couldn't get out! It was dreadful!\
\
      He whimpered in his sleep. The bed had begun to go round too; it\
      was outside him and inside him; going round and round, and\
      getting fiery, and Mother Lee out of Cast up by the Sea was\
      stirring it! Oh! so horrible she looked! Faster and faster!\'97till\
      he and the bed and Mother Lee and the moon and the cat were all\
      one wheel going round and round and up and up\'97awful\'97awful\'97awful!\
\
      He shrieked.\
\
      A voice saying: \'93Darling, darling!\'94 got through the wheel, and he\
      awoke, standing on his bed, with his eyes wide open.\
\
      There was his mother, with her hair like Guinevere's, and,\
      clutching her, he buried his face in it.\
\
      \'93Oh! oh!\'94\
\
      \'93It's all right, treasure. You're awake now. There! There! It's\
      nothing!\'94\
\
      But little Jon continued to say: \'93Oh! oh!\'94\
\
      Her voice went on, velvety in his ear:\
\
      \'93It was the moonlight, sweetheart, coming on your face.\'94\
\
      Little Jon burbled into her nightgown\
\
      \'93You said it was beautiful. Oh!\'94\
\
      \'93Not to sleep in, Jon. Who let it in? Did you draw the curtains?\'94\
\
      \'93I wanted to see the time; I\'97I looked out, I\'97I heard you playing,\
      Mum; I\'97I ate my macaroon.\'94 But he was growing slowly comforted;\
      and the instinct to excuse his fear revived within him.\
\
      \'93Mother Lee went round in me and got all fiery,\'94 he mumbled.\
\
      \'93Well, Jon, what can you expect if you eat macaroons after you've\
      gone to bed?\'94\
\
      \'93Only one, Mum; it made the music ever so more beautiful. I was\
      waiting for you\'97I nearly thought it was to-morrow.\'94\
\
      \'93My ducky, it's only just eleven now.\'94\
\
      Little Jon was silent, rubbing his nose on her neck.\
\
      \'93Mum, is Daddy in your room?\'94\
\
      \'93Not to-night.\'94\
\
      \'93Can I come?\'94\
\
      \'93If you wish, my precious.\'94\
\
      Half himself again, little Jon drew back.\
\
      \'93You look different, Mum; ever so younger.\'94\
\
      \'93It's my hair, darling.\'94\
\
      Little Jon laid hold of it, thick, dark gold, with a few silver\
      threads.\
\
      \'93I like it,\'94 he said: \'93I like you best of all like this.\'94\
\
      Taking her hand, he had begun dragging her towards the door. He\
      shut it as they passed, with a sigh of relief.\
\
      \'93Which side of the bed do you like, Mum?\'94\
\
      \'93The left side.\'94\
\
      \'93All right.\'94\
\
      Wasting no time, giving her no chance to change her mind, little\
      Jon got into the bed, which seemed much softer than his own. He\
      heaved another sigh, screwed his head into the pillow and lay\
      examining the battle of chariots and swords and spears which\
      always went on outside blankets, where the little hairs stood up\
      against the light.\
\
      \'93It wasn't anything, really, was it?\'94 he said.\
\
      From before her glass his mother answered:\
\
      \'93Nothing but the moon and your imagination heated up. You mustn't\
      get so excited, Jon.\'94\
\
      But, still not quite in possession of his nerves, little Jon\
      answered boastfully:\
\
      \'93I wasn't afraid, really, of course!\'94 And again he lay watching\
      the spears and chariots. It all seemed very long.\
\
      \'93Oh! Mum, do hurry up!\'94\
\
      \'93Darling, I have to plait my hair.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! not to-night. You'll only have to unplait it again\
      to-morrow. I'm sleepy now; if you don't come, I shan't be sleepy\
      soon.\'94\
\
      His mother stood up white and flowey before the winged mirror: he\
      could see three of her, with her neck turned and her hair bright\
      under the light, and her dark eyes smiling. It was unnecessary,\
      and he said:\
\
      \'93Do come, Mum; I'm waiting.\'94\
\
      \'93Very well, my love, I'll come.\'94\
\
      Little Jon closed his eyes. Everything was turning out most\
      satisfactory, only she must hurry up! He felt the bed shake, she\
      was getting in. And, still with his eyes closed, he said\
      sleepily: \'93It's nice, isn't it?\'94\
\
      He heard her voice say something, felt her lips touching his\
      nose, and, snuggling up beside her who lay awake and loved him\
      with her thoughts, he fell into the dreamless sleep, which\
      rounded off his past.\
\
\
\
\
      TO LET\
     \'93From out the fatal loins of those two foes A pair of star-crossed\
     lovers take their life.\'94 \'97Romeo and Juliet.\
      TO CHARLES SCRIBNER\
\
\
\
      PART I\
\
\
\
\
\
      I.\'97ENCOUNTER\
\
      Soames Forsyte emerged from the Knightsbridge Hotel, where he was\
      staying, in the afternoon of the 12th of May, 1920, with the\
      intention of visiting a collection of pictures in a Gallery off\
      Cork Street, and looking into the Future. He walked. Since the\
      War he never took a cab if he could help it. Their drivers were,\
      in his view, an uncivil lot, though now that the War was over and\
      supply beginning to exceed demand again, getting more civil in\
      accordance with the custom of human nature. Still, he had not\
      forgiven them, deeply identifying them with gloomy memories, and\
      now, dimly, like all members, of their class, with revolution.\
      The considerable anxiety he had passed through during the War,\
      and the more considerable anxiety he had since undergone in the\
      Peace, had produced psychological consequences in a tenacious\
      nature. He had, mentally, so frequently experienced ruin, that he\
      had ceased to believe in its material probability. Paying away\
      four thousand a year in income and super tax, one could not very\
      well be worse off! A fortune of a quarter of a million,\
      encumbered only by a wife and one daughter, and very diversely\
      invested, afforded substantial guarantee even against that\
      \'93wildcat notion\'94 a levy on capital. And as to confiscation of war\
      profits, he was entirely in favour of it, for he had none, and\
      \'93serve the beggars right!\'94 The price of pictures, moreover, had,\
      if anything, gone up, and he had done better with his collection\
      since the War began than ever before. Air-raids, also, had acted\
      beneficially on a spirit congenitally cautious, and hardened a\
      character already dogged. To be in danger of being entirely\
      dispersed inclined one to be less apprehensive of the more\
      partial dispersions involved in levies and taxation, while the\
      habit of condemning the impudence of the Germans had led\
      naturally to condemning that of Labour, if not openly at least in\
      the sanctuary of his soul.\
\
      He walked. There was, moreover, time to spare, for Fleur was to\
      meet him at the Gallery at four o'clock, and it was as yet but\
      half-past two. It was good for him to walk\'97his liver was a little\
      constricted, and his nerves rather on edge. His wife was always\
      out when she was in Town, and his daughter would flibberty-gibbet\
      all over the place like most young women since the War. Still, he\
      must be thankful that she had been too young to do anything in\
      that War itself. Not, of course, that he had not supported the\
      War from its inception, with all his soul, but between that and\
      supporting it with the bodies of his wife and daughter, there had\
      been a gap fixed by something old-fashioned within him which\
      abhorred emotional extravagance. He had, for instance, strongly\
      objected to Annette, so attractive, and in 1914 only thirty-four,\
      going to her native France, her \'93chere patrie\'94 as, under the\
      stimulus of war, she had begun to call it, to nurse her \'93braves\
      poilus,\'94 forsooth! Ruining her health and her looks! As if she\
      were really a nurse! He had put a stopper on it. Let her do\
      needlework for them at home, or knit! She had not gone,\
      therefore, and had never been quite the same woman since. A bad\
      tendency of hers to mock at him, not openly, but in continual\
      little ways, had grown. As for Fleur, the War had resolved the\
      vexed problem whether or not she should go to school. She was\
      better away from her mother in her war mood, from the chance of\
      air-raids, and the impetus to do extravagant things; so he had\
      placed her in a seminary as far West as had seemed to him\
      compatible with excellence, and had missed her horribly. Fleur!\
      He had never regretted the somewhat outlandish name by which at\
      her birth he had decided so suddenly to call her\'97marked\
      concession though it had been to the French. Fleur! A pretty\
      name\'97a pretty child! But restless\'97too restless; and wilful!\
      Knowing her power too over her father! Soames often reflected on\
      the mistake it was to dote on his daughter. To get old and dote!\
      Sixty-five! He was getting on; but he didn't feel it, for,\
      fortunately perhaps, considering Annette's youth and good looks,\
      his second marriage had turned out a cool affair. He had known\
      but one real passion in his life\'97for that first wife of\
      his\'97Irene. Yes, and that fellow, his cousin Jolyon, who had gone\
      off with her, was looking very shaky, they said. No wonder, at\
      seventy-two, after twenty years of a third marriage!\
\
      Soames paused a moment in his march to lean over the railings of\
      the Row. A suitable spot for reminiscence, half-way between that\
      house in Park Lane which had seen his birth and his parents'\
      deaths, and the little house in Montpellier Square where\
      thirty-five years ago he had enjoyed his first edition of\
      matrimony. Now, after twenty years of his second edition, that\
      old tragedy seemed to him like a previous existence\'97which had\
      ended when Fleur was born in place of the son he had hoped for.\
      For many years he had ceased regretting, even vaguely, the son\
      who had not been born; Fleur filled the bill in his heart. After\
      all, she bore his name; and he was not looking forward at all to\
      the time when she would change it. Indeed, if he ever thought of\
      such a calamity, it was seasoned by the vague feeling that he\
      could make her rich enough to purchase perhaps and extinguish the\
      name of the fellow who married her\'97why not, since, as it seemed,\
      women were equal to men nowadays? And Soames, secretly convinced\
      that they were not, passed his curved hand over his face\
      vigorously, till it reached the comfort of his chin. Thanks to\
      abstemious habits, he had not grown fat and gabby; his nose was\
      pale and thin, his grey moustache close-clipped, his eyesight\
      unimpaired. A slight stoop closened and corrected the expansion\
      given to his face by the heightening of his forehead in the\
      recession of his grey hair. Little change had Time wrought in the\
      \'93warmest\'94 of the young Forsytes, as the last of the old\
      Forsytes\'97Timothy-now in his hundred and first year, would have\
      phrased it.\
\
      The shade from the plane-trees fell on his neat Homburg hat; he\
      had given up top hats\'97it was no use attracting attention to\
      wealth in days like these. Plane-trees! His thoughts travelled\
      sharply to Madrid\'97the Easter before the War, when, having to make\
      up his mind about that Goya picture, he had taken a voyage of\
      discovery to study the painter on his spot. The fellow had\
      impressed him\'97great range, real genius! Highly as the chap\
      ranked, he would rank even higher before they had finished with\
      him. The second Goya craze would be greater even than the first;\
      oh, yes! And he had bought. On that visit he had\'97as never\
      before\'97commissioned a copy of a fresco painting called \'93La\
      Vendimia,\'94 wherein was the figure of a girl with an arm akimbo,\
      who had reminded him of his daughter. He had it now in the\
      Gallery at Mapledurham, and rather poor it was\'97you couldn't copy\
      Goya. He would still look at it, however, if his daughter were\
      not there, for the sake of something irresistibly reminiscent in\
      the light, erect balance of the figure, the width between the\
      arching eyebrows, the eager dreaming of the dark eyes. Curious\
      that Fleur should have dark eyes, when his own were grey\'97no pure\
      Forsyte had brown eyes\'97and her mother's blue! But of course her\
      grandmother Lamotte's eyes were dark as treacle!\
\
      He began to walk on again toward Hyde Park Corner. No greater\
      change in all England than in the Row! Born almost within hail of\
      it, he could remember it from 1860 on. Brought there as a child\
      between the crinolines to stare at tight-trousered dandies in\
      whiskers, riding with a cavalry seat; to watch the doffing of\
      curly-brimmed and white top hats; the leisurely air of it all,\
      and the little bow-legged man in a long red waistcoat who used to\
      come among the fashion with dogs on several strings, and try to\
      sell one to his mother: King Charles spaniels, Italian\
      greyhounds, affectionate to her crinoline\'97you never saw them now.\
      You saw no quality of any sort, indeed, just working people\
      sitting in dull rows with nothing to stare at but a few young\
      bouncing females in pot hats, riding astride, or desultory\
      Colonials charging up and down on dismal-looking hacks; with,\
      here and there, little girls on ponies, or old gentlemen jogging\
      their livers, or an orderly trying a great galumphing cavalry\
      horse; no thoroughbreds, no grooms, no bowing, no scraping, no\
      gossip\'97nothing; only the trees the same\'97the trees indifferent to\
      the generations and declensions of mankind. A democratic\
      England\'97dishevelled, hurried, noisy, and seemingly without an\
      apex. And that something fastidious in the soul of Soames turned\
      over within him. Gone forever, the close borough of rank and\
      polish! Wealth there was\'97oh, yes! wealth\'97he himself was a richer\
      man than his father had ever been; but manners, flavour, quality,\
      all gone, engulfed in one vast, ugly, shoulder-rubbing,\
      petrol-smelling Cheerio. Little half-beaten pockets of gentility\
      and caste lurking here and there, dispersed and chetif, as\
      Annette would say; but nothing ever again firm and coherent to\
      look up to. And into this new hurly-burly of bad manners and\
      loose morals his daughter\'97flower of his life\'97was flung! And when\
      those Labour chaps got power\'97if they ever did\'97the worst was yet\
      to come.\
\
      He passed out under the archway, at last no longer\'97thank\
      goodness!\'97disfigured by the gungrey of its search-light. 'They'd\
      better put a search-light on to where they're all going,' he\
      thought, 'and light up their precious democracy!' And he directed\
      his steps along the Club fronts of Piccadilly. George Forsyte, of\
      course, would be sitting in the bay window of the Iseeum. The\
      chap was so big now that he was there nearly all his time, like\
      some immovable, sardonic, humorous eye noting the decline of men\
      and things. And Soames hurried, ever constitutionally uneasy\
      beneath his cousin's glance. George, who, as he had heard, had\
      written a letter signed \'93Patriot\'94 in the middle of the War,\
      complaining of the Government's hysteria in docking the oats of\
      race-horses. Yes, there he was, tall, ponderous, neat,\
      clean-shaven, with his smooth hair, hardly thinned, smelling, no\
      doubt, of the best hair-wash, and a pink paper in his hand. Well,\
      he didn't change! And for perhaps the first time in his life\
      Soames felt a kind of sympathy tapping in his waistcoat for that\
      sardonic kinsman. With his weight, his perfectly parted hair, and\
      bull-like gaze, he was a guarantee that the old order would take\
      some shifting yet. He saw George move the pink paper as if\
      inviting him to ascend\'97the chap must want to ask something about\
      his property. It was still under Soames' control; for in the\
      adoption of a sleeping partnership at that painful period twenty\
      years back when he had divorced Irene, Soames had found himself\
      almost insensibly retaining control of all purely Forsyte\
      affairs.\
\
      Hesitating for just a moment, he nodded and went in. Since the\
      death of his brother-in-law Montague Dartie, in Paris, which no\
      one had quite known what to make of, except that it was certainly\
      not suicide\'97the Iseeum Club had seemed more respectable to\
      Soames. George, too, he knew, had sown the last of his wild oats,\
      and was committed definitely to the joys of the table, eating\
      only of the very best so as to keep his weight down, and owning,\
      as he said, \'93just one or two old screws to give me an interest in\
      life.\'94 He joined his cousin, therefore, in the bay window without\
      the embarrassing sense of indiscretion he had been used to feel\
      up there. George put out a well-kept hand.\
\
      \'93Haven't seen you since the War,\'94 he said. \'93How's your wife?\'94\
\
      \'93Thanks,\'94 said Soames coldly, \'93well enough.\'94\
\
      Some hidden jest curved, for a moment, George's fleshy face, and\
      gloated from his eye.\
\
      \'93That Belgian chap, Profond,\'94 he said, \'93is a member here now.\
      He's a rum customer.\'94\
\
      \'93Quite!\'94 muttered Soames. \'93What did you want to see me about?\'94\
\
      \'93Old Timothy; he might go off the hooks at any moment. I suppose\
      he's made his Will.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, you or somebody ought to give him a look up\'97last of the\
      old lot; he's a hundred, you know. They say he's like a mummy.\
      Where are you goin' to put him? He ought to have a pyramid by\
      rights.\'94\
\
      Soames shook his head. \'93Highgate, the family vault.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, I suppose the old girls would miss him, if he was anywhere\
      else. They say he still takes an interest in food. He might last\
      on, you know. Don't we get anything for the old Forsytes? Ten of\
      them\'97average age eighty-eight\'97I worked it out. That ought to be\
      equal to triplets.\'94\
\
      \'93Is that all?\'94 said Soames, \'93I must be getting on.\'94\
\
      'You unsociable devil,' George's eyes seemed to answer. \'93Yes,\
      that's all: Look him up in his mausoleum\'97the old chap might want\
      to prophesy.\'94 The grin died on the rich curves of his face, and\
      he added: \'93Haven't you attorneys invented a way yet of dodging\
      this damned income tax? It hits the fixed inherited income like\
      the very deuce. I used to have two thousand five hundred a year;\
      now I've got a beggarly fifteen hundred, and the price of living\
      doubled.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 murmured Soames, \'93the turf's in danger.\'94\
\
      Over George's face moved a gleam of sardonic self-defence.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said, \'93they brought me up to do nothing, and here I am\
      in the sear and yellow, getting poorer every day. These Labour\
      chaps mean to have the lot before they've done. What are you\
      going to do for a living when it comes? I shall work a six-hour\
      day teaching politicians how to see a joke. Take my tip, Soames;\
      go into Parliament, make sure of your four hundred\'97and employ\
      me.\'94\
\
      And, as Soames retired, he resumed his seat in the bay window.\
\
      Soames moved along Piccadilly deep in reflections excited by his\
      cousin's words. He himself had always been a worker and a saver,\
      George always a drone and a spender; and yet, if confiscation\
      once began, it was he\'97the worker and the saver\'97who would be\
      looted! That was the negation of all virtue, the overturning of\
      all Forsyte principles. Could civilization be built on any other?\
      He did not think so. Well, they wouldn't confiscate his pictures,\
      for they wouldn't know their worth. But what would they be worth,\
      if these maniacs once began to milk capital? A drug on the\
      market. 'I don't care about myself,' he thought; 'I could live on\
      five hundred a year, and never know the difference, at my age.'\
      But Fleur! This fortune, so widely invested, these treasures so\
      carefully chosen and amassed, were all for\'97her. And if it should\
      turn out that he couldn't give or leave them to her\'97well, life\
      had no meaning, and what was the use of going in to look at this\
      crazy, futuristic stuff with the view of seeing whether it had\
      any future?\
\
      Arriving at the Gallery off Cork Street, however, he paid his\
      shilling, picked up a catalogue, and entered. Some ten persons\
      were prowling round. Soames took steps and came on what looked to\
      him like a lamp-post bent by collision with a motor omnibus. It\
      was advanced some three paces from the wall, and was described in\
      his catalogue as \'93Jupiter.\'94 He examined it with curiosity, having\
      recently turned some of his attention to sculpture. 'If that's\
      Jupiter,' he thought, 'I wonder what Juno's like.' And suddenly\
      he saw her, opposite. She appeared to him like nothing so much as\
      a pump with two handles, lightly clad in snow. He was still\
      gazing at her, when two of the prowlers halted on his left.\
      \'93Epatant!\'94 he heard one say.\
\
      \'93Jargon!\'94 growled Soames to himself.\
\
      The other's boyish voice replied\
\
      \'93Missed it, old bean; he's pulling your leg. When Jove and Juno\
      created he them, he was saying: 'I'll see how much these fools\
      will swallow.' And they've lapped up the lot.\'94\
\
      \'93You young duffer! Vospovitch is an innovator. Don't you see that\
      he's brought satire into sculpture? The future of plastic art, of\
      music, painting, and even architecture, has set in satiric. It\
      was bound to. People are tired\'97the bottom's tumbled out of\
      sentiment.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, I'm quite equal to taking a little interest in beauty. I\
      was through the War. You've dropped your handkerchief, sir.\'94\
\
      Soames saw a handkerchief held out in front of him. He took it\
      with some natural suspicion, and approached it to his nose. It\
      had the right scent\'97of distant Eau de Cologne\'97and his initials in\
      a corner. Slightly reassured, he raised his eyes to the young\
      man's face. It had rather fawn-like ears, a laughing mouth, with\
      half a toothbrush growing out of it on each side, and small\
      lively eyes, above a normally dressed appearance.\
\
      \'93Thank you,\'94 he said; and moved by a sort of irritation, added:\
      \'93Glad to hear you like beauty; that's rare, nowadays.\'94\
\
      \'93I dote on it,\'94 said the young man; \'93but you and I are the last\
      of the old guard, sir.\'94\
\
      Soames smiled.\
\
      \'93If you really care for pictures,\'94 he said, \'93here's my card. I\
      can show you some quite good ones any Sunday, if you're down the\
      river and care to look in.\'94\
\
      \'93Awfully nice of you, sir. I'll drop in like a bird. My name's\
      Mont-Michael.\'94 And he took off his hat.\
\
      Soames, already regretting his impulse, raised his own slightly\
      in response, with a downward look at the young man's companion,\
      who had a purple tie, dreadful little sluglike whiskers, and a\
      scornful look\'97as if he were a poet!\
\
      It was the first indiscretion he had committed for so long that\
      he went and sat down in an alcove. What had possessed him to give\
      his card to a rackety young fellow, who went about with a thing\
      like that? And Fleur, always at the back of his thoughts, started\
      out like a filigree figure from a clock when the hour strikes. On\
      the screen opposite the alcove was a large canvas with a great\
      many square tomato-coloured blobs on it, and nothing else, so far\
      as Soames could see from where he sat. He looked at his\
      catalogue: \'93No. 32 'The Future Town'\'97Paul Post.\'94 'I suppose\
      that's satiric too,' he thought. 'What a thing!' But his second\
      impulse was more cautious. It did not do to condemn hurriedly.\
      There had been those stripey, streaky creations of Monet's, which\
      had turned out such trumps; and then the stippled school; and\
      Gauguin. Why, even since the Post-Impressionists there had been\
      one or two painters not to be sneezed at. During the thirty-eight\
      years of his connoisseur's life, indeed, he had marked so many\
      \'93movements,\'94 seen the tides of taste and technique so ebb and\
      flow, that there was really no telling anything except that there\
      was money to be made out of every change of fashion. This too\
      might quite well be a case where one must subdue primordial\
      instinct, or lose the market. He got up and stood before the\
      picture, trying hard to see it with the eyes of other people.\
      Above the tomato blobs was what he took to be a sunset, till some\
      one passing said: \'93He's got the airplanes wonderfully, don't you\
      think!\'94 Below the tomato blobs was a band of white with vertical\
      black stripes, to which he could assign no meaning whatever, till\
      some one else came by, murmuring: \'93What expression he gets with\
      his foreground!\'94 Expression? Of what? Soames went back to his\
      seat. The thing was \'93rich,\'94 as his father would have said, and he\
      wouldn't give a damn for it. Expression! Ah! they were all\
      Expressionists now, he had heard, on the Continent. So it was\
      coming here too, was it? He remembered the first wave of\
      influenza in 1887\'97or '8\'97hatched in China, so they said. He\
      wondered where this\'97this Expressionism had been hatched. The\
      thing was a regular disease!\
\
      He had become conscious of a woman and a youth standing between\
      him and the \'93Future Town.\'94 Their backs were turned; but very\
      suddenly Soames put his catalogue before his face, and drawing\
      his hat forward, gazed through the slit between. No mistaking\
      that back, elegant as ever though the hair above had gone grey.\
      Irene! His divorced wife\'97Irene! And this, no doubt, was\'97her\
      son\'97by that fellow Jolyon Forsyte\'97their boy, six months older\
      than his own girl! And mumbling over in his mind the bitter days\
      of his divorce, he rose to get out of sight, but quickly sat down\
      again. She had turned her head to speak to her boy; her profile\
      was still so youthful that it made her grey hair seem powdery, as\
      if fancy-dressed; and her lips were smiling as Soames, first\
      possessor of them, had never seen them smile. Grudgingly he\
      admitted her still beautiful and in figure almost as young as\
      ever. And how that boy smiled back at her! Emotion squeezed\
      Soames' heart. The sight infringed his sense of justice. He\
      grudged her that boy's smile\'97it went beyond what Fleur gave him,\
      and it was undeserved. Their son might have been his son; Fleur\
      might have been her daughter, if she had kept straight! He\
      lowered his catalogue. If she saw him, all the better! A reminder\
      of her conduct in the presence of her son, who probably knew\
      nothing of it, would be a salutary touch from the finger of that\
      Nemesis which surely must soon or late visit her! Then,\
      half-conscious that such a thought was extravagant for a Forsyte\
      of his age, Soames took out his watch. Past four! Fleur was late.\
      She had gone to his niece Imogen Cardigan's, and there they would\
      keep her smoking cigarettes and gossiping, and that. He heard the\
      boy laugh, and say eagerly: \'93I say, Mum, is this by one of Auntie\
      June's lame ducks?\'94\
\
      \'93Paul Post\'97I believe it is, darling.\'94\
\
      The word produced a little shock in Soames; he had never heard\
      her use it. And then she saw him. His eyes must have had in them\
      something of George Forsyte's sardonic look; for her gloved hand\
      crisped the folds of her frock, her eyebrows rose, her face went\
      stony. She moved on.\
\
      \'93It is a caution,\'94 said the boy, catching her arm again.\
\
      Soames stared after them. That boy was good-looking, with a\
      Forsyte chin, and eyes deep-grey, deep in; but with something\
      sunny, like a glass of old sherry spilled over him; his smile\
      perhaps, his hair. Better than they deserved\'97those two! They\
      passed from his view into the next room, and Soames continued to\
      regard the Future Town, but saw it not. A little smile snarled up\
      his lips. He was despising the vehemence of his own feelings\
      after all these years. Ghosts! And yet as one grew old\'97was there\
      anything but what was ghost-like left? Yes, there was Fleur! He\
      fixed his eyes on the entrance. She was due; but she would keep\
      him waiting, of course! And suddenly he became aware of a sort of\
      human breeze\'97a short, slight form clad in a sea-green djibbah\
      with a metal belt and a fillet binding unruly red-gold hair all\
      streaked with grey. She was talking to the Gallery attendants,\
      and something familiar riveted his gaze\'97in her eyes, her chin,\
      her hair, her spirit\'97something which suggested a thin Skye\
      terrier just before its dinner. Surely June Forsyte! His cousin\
      June\'97and coming straight to his recess! She sat down beside him,\
      deep in thought, took out a tablet, and made a pencil note.\
      Soames sat unmoving. A confounded thing, cousinship!\
      \'93Disgusting!\'94 he heard her murmur; then, as if resenting the\
      presence of an overhearing stranger, she looked at him. The worst\
      had happened.\
\
      \'93Soames!\'94\
\
      Soames turned his head a very little.\
\
      \'93How are you?\'94 he said. \'93Haven't seen you for twenty years.\'94\
\
      \'93No. Whatever made you come here?\'94\
\
      \'93My sins,\'94 said Soames. \'93What stuff!\'94\
\
      \'93Stuff? Oh, yes\'97of course; it hasn't arrived yet.\
\
      \'93It never will,\'94 said Soames; \'93it must be making a dead loss.\'94\
\
      \'93Of course it is.\'94\
\
      \'93How d'you know?\'94\
\
      \'93It's my Gallery.\'94\
\
      Soames sniffed from sheer surprise.\
\
      \'93Yours? What on earth makes you run a show like this?\'94\
\
      \'93I don't treat Art as if it were grocery.\'94\
\
      Soames pointed to the Future Town. \'93Look at that! Who's going to\
      live in a town like that, or with it on his walls?\'94\
\
      June contemplated the picture for a moment.\
\
      \'93It's a vision,\'94 she said.\
\
      \'93The deuce!\'94\
\
      There was silence, then June rose. 'Crazylooking creature!' he\
      thought.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said, \'93you'll find your young stepbrother here with a\
      woman I used to know. If you take my advice, you'll close this\
      exhibition.\'94\
\
      June looked back at him. \'93Oh! You Forsyte!\'94 she said, and moved\
      on. About her light, fly-away figure, passing so suddenly away,\
      was a look of dangerous decisions. Forsyte! Of course, he was a\
      Forsyte! And so was she! But from the time when, as a mere girl,\
      she brought Bosinney into his life to wreck it, he had never hit\
      it off with June and never would! And here she was, unmarried to\
      this day, owning a Gallery!... And suddenly it came to Soames how\
      little he knew now of his own family. The old aunts at Timothy's\
      had been dead so many years; there was no clearing-house for\
      news. What had they all done in the War? Young Roger's boy had\
      been wounded, St. John Hayman's second son killed; young\
      Nicholas' eldest had got an O. B. E., or whatever they gave them.\
      They had all joined up somehow, he believed. That boy of Jolyon's\
      and Irene's, he supposed, had been too young; his own generation,\
      of course, too old, though Giles Hayman had driven a car for the\
      Red Cross\'97and Jesse Hayman been a special constable\'97those\
      \'93Dromios\'94 had always been of a sporting type! As for himself, he\
      had given a motor ambulance, read the papers till he was sick of\
      them, passed through much anxiety, bought no clothes, lost seven\
      pounds in weight; he didn't know what more he could have done at\
      his age. Indeed, thinking it over, it struck him that he and his\
      family had taken this war very differently to that affair with\
      the Boers, which had been supposed to tax all the resources of\
      the Empire. In that old war, of course, his nephew Val Dartie had\
      been wounded, that fellow Jolyon's first son had died of enteric,\
      \'93the Dromios\'94 had gone out on horses, and June had been a nurse;\
      but all that had seemed in the nature of a portent, while in this\
      war everybody had done \'93their bit,\'94 so far as he could make out,\
      as a matter of course. It seemed to show the growth of something\
      or other\'97or perhaps the decline of something else. Had the\
      Forsytes become less individual, or more Imperial, or less\
      provincial? Or was it simply that one hated Germans?... Why\
      didn't Fleur come, so that he could get away? He saw those three\
      return together from the other room and pass back along the far\
      side of the screen. The boy was standing before the Juno now.\
      And, suddenly, on the other side of her, Soames saw\'97his daughter,\
      with eyebrows raised, as well they might be. He could see her\
      eyes glint sideways at the boy, and the boy look back at her.\
      Then Irene slipped her hand through his arm, and drew him on.\
      Soames saw him glancing round, and Fleur looking after them as\
      the three went out.\
\
      A voice said cheerfully: \'93Bit thick, isn't it, sir?\'94\
\
      The young man who had handed him his handkerchief was again\
      passing. Soames nodded.\
\
      \'93I don't know what we're coming to.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! That's all right, sir,\'94 answered the young man cheerfully;\
      \'93they don't either.\'94\
\
      Fleur's voice said: \'93Hallo, Father! Here you are!\'94 precisely as\
      if he had been keeping her waiting.\
\
      The young man, snatching off his hat, passed on.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Soames, looking her up and down, \'93you're a punctual\
      sort of young woman!\'94\
\
      This treasured possession of his life was of medium height and\
      colour, with short, dark chestnut hair; her wide-apart brown eyes\
      were set in whites so clear that they glinted when they moved,\
      and yet in repose were almost dreamy under very white,\
      black-lashed lids, held over them in a sort of suspense. She had\
      a charming profile, and nothing of her father in her face save a\
      decided chin. Aware that his expression was softening as he\
      looked at her, Soames frowned to preserve the unemotionalism\
      proper to a Forsyte. He knew she was only too inclined to take\
      advantage of his weakness.\
\
      Slipping her hand under his arm, she said:\
\
      \'93Who was that?\'94\
\
      \'93He picked up my handkerchief. We talked about the pictures.\'94\
\
      \'93You're not going to buy that, Father?\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Soames grimly; \'93nor that Juno you've been looking at.\'94\
\
      Fleur dragged at his arm. \'93Oh! Let's go! It's a ghastly show.\'94\
\
      In the doorway they passed the young man called Mont and his\
      partner. But Soames had hung out a board marked \'93Trespassers will\
      be prosecuted,\'94 and he barely acknowledged the young fellow's\
      salute.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said in the street, \'93whom did you meet at Imogen's?\'94\
\
      \'93Aunt Winifred, and that Monsieur Profond.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 muttered Soames; \'93that chap! What does your aunt see in\
      him?\'94\
\
      \'93I don't know. He looks pretty deep\'97mother says she likes him.\'94\
\
      Soames grunted.\
\
      \'93Cousin Val and his wife were there, too.\'94\
\
      \'93What!\'94 said Soames. \'93I thought they were back in South Africa.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, no! They've sold their farm. Cousin Val is going to train\
      race-horses on the Sussex Downs. They've got a jolly old\
      manor-house; they asked me down there.\'94\
\
      Soames coughed: the news was distasteful to him. \'93What's his wife\
      like now?\'94\
\
      \'93Very quiet, but nice, I think.\'94\
\
      Soames coughed again. \'93He's a rackety chap, your Cousin Val.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! no, Father; they're awfully devoted. I promised to\
      go\'97Saturday to Wednesday next.\'94\
\
      \'93Training race-horses!\'94 said Soames. It was extravagant, but not\
      the reason for his distaste. Why the deuce couldn't his nephew\
      have stayed out in South Africa? His own divorce had been bad\
      enough, without his nephew's marriage to the daughter of the\
      co-respondent; a half-sister too of June, and of that boy whom\
      Fleur had just been looking at from under the pump-handle. If he\
      didn't look out, she would come to know all about that old\
      disgrace! Unpleasant things! They were round him this afternoon\
      like a swarm of bees!\
\
      \'93I don't like it!\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93I want to see the race-horses,\'94 murmured Fleur; \'93and they've\
      promised I shall ride. Cousin Val can't walk much, you know; but\
      he can ride perfectly. He's going to show me their gallops.\'94\
\
      \'93Racing!\'94 said Soames. \'93It's a pity the War didn't knock that on\
      the head. He's taking after his father, I'm afraid.\'94\
\
      \'93I don't know anything about his father.\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Soames, grimly. \'93He took an interest in horses and\
      broke his neck in Paris, walking down-stairs. Good riddance for\
      your aunt.\'94 He frowned, recollecting the inquiry into those\
      stairs which he had attended in Paris six years ago, because\
      Montague Dartie could not attend it himself\'97perfectly normal\
      stairs in a house where they played baccarat. Either his winnings\
      or the way he had celebrated them had gone to his\
      brother-in-law's head. The French procedure had been very loose;\
      he had had a lot of trouble with it.\
\
      A sound from Fleur distracted his attention. \'93Look! The people\
      who were in the Gallery with us.\'94\
\
      \'93What people?\'94 muttered Soames, who knew perfectly well.\
\
      \'93I think that woman's beautiful.\'94\
\
      \'93Come into this pastry-cook's,\'94 said Soames abruptly, and\
      tightening his grip on her arm he turned into a confectioner's.\
      It was\'97for him\'97a surprising thing to do, and he said rather\
      anxiously: \'93What will you have?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! I don't want anything. I had a cocktail and a tremendous\
      lunch.\'94\
\
      \'93We must have something now we're here,\'94 muttered Soames, keeping\
      hold of her arm.\
\
      \'93Two teas,\'94 he said; \'93and two of those nougat things.\'94\
\
      But no sooner was his body seated than his soul sprang up. Those\
      three\'97those three were coming in! He heard Irene say something to\
      her boy, and his answer:\
\
      \'93Oh! no, Mum; this place is all right. My stunt.\'94 And the three\
      sat down.\
\
      At that moment, most awkward of his existence, crowded with\
      ghosts and shadows from his past, in presence of the only two\
      women he had ever loved\'97his divorced wife and his daughter by her\
      successor\'97Soames was not so much afraid of them as of his cousin\
      June. She might make a scene\'97she might introduce those two\
      children\'97she was capable of anything. He bit too hastily at the\
      nougat, and it stuck to his plate. Working at it with his finger,\
      he glanced at Fleur. She was masticating dreamily, but her eyes\
      were on the boy. The Forsyte in him said: \'93Think, feel, and\
      you're done for!\'94 And he wiggled his finger desperately. Plate!\
      Did Jolyon wear a plate? Did that woman wear a plate? Time had\
      been when he had seen her wearing nothing! That was something,\
      anyway, which had never been stolen from him. And she knew it,\
      though she might sit there calm and self-possessed, as if she had\
      never been his wife. An acid humour stirred in his Forsyte blood;\
      a subtle pain divided by hair's breadth from pleasure. If only\
      June did not suddenly bring her hornets about his ears! The boy\
      was talking.\
\
      \'93Of course, Auntie June\'94\'97so he called his half-sister \'93Auntie,\'94\
      did he?\'97well, she must be fifty, if she was a day!\'97\'93it's jolly\
      good of you to encourage them. Only\'97hang it all!\'94 Soames stole a\
      glance. Irene's startled eyes were bent watchfully on her boy.\
      She\'97she had these devotions\'97for Bosinney\'97for that boy's\
      father\'97for this boy! He touched Fleur's arm, and said:\
\
      \'93Well, have you had enough?\'94\
\
      \'93One more, Father, please.\'94\
\
      She would be sick! He went to the counter to pay. When he turned\
      round again he saw Fleur standing near the door, holding a\
      handkerchief which the boy had evidently just handed to her.\
\
      \'93F. F.,\'94 he heard her say. \'93Fleur Forsyte\'97it's mine all right.\
      Thank you ever so.\'94\
\
      Good God! She had caught the trick from what he'd told her in the\
      Gallery\'97monkey!\
\
      \'93Forsyte? Why\'97that's my name too. Perhaps we're cousins.\'94\
\
      \'93Really! We must be. There aren't any others. I live at\
      Mapledurham; where do you?\'94\
\
      \'93Robin Hill.\'94\
\
      Question and answer had been so rapid that all was over before he\
      could lift a finger. He saw Irene's face alive with startled\
      feeling, gave the slightest shake of his head, and slipped his\
      arm through Fleur's.\
\
      \'93Come along!\'94 he said.\
\
      She did not move.\
\
      \'93Didn't you hear, Father? Isn't it queer\'97our name's the same. Are\
      we cousins?\'94\
\
      \'93What's that?\'94 he said. \'93Forsyte? Distant, perhaps.\'94\
\
      \'93My name's Jolyon, sir. Jon, for short.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! Ah!\'94 said Soames. \'93Yes. Distant. How are you? Very good of\
      you. Good-bye!\'94\
\
      He moved on.\
\
      \'93Thanks awfully,\'94 Fleur was saying. \'93Au revoir!\'94\
\
      \'93Au revoir!\'94 he heard the boy reply.\
\
\
\
\
      II.\'97FINE FLEUR FORSYTE\
\
      Emerging from the \'93pastry-cook's,\'94 Soames' first impulse was to\
      vent his nerves by saying to his daughter: 'Dropping your\
      hand-kerchief!' to which her reply might well be: 'I picked that\
      up from you!' His second impulse therefore was to let sleeping\
      dogs lie. But she would surely question him. He gave her a\
      sidelong look, and found she was giving him the same. She said\
      softly:\
\
      \'93Why don't you like those cousins, Father?\'94 Soames lifted the\
      corner of his lip.\
\
      \'93What made you think that?\'94\
\
      \'93Cela se voit.\'94\
\
      'That sees itself!' What a way of putting it! After twenty years\
      of a French wife Soames had still little sympathy with her\
      language; a theatrical affair and connected in his mind with all\
      the refinements of domestic irony.\
\
      \'93How?\'94 he asked.\
\
      \'93You must know them; and you didn't make a sign. I saw them\
      looking at you.\'94\
\
      \'93I've never seen the boy in my life,\'94 replied Soames with perfect\
      truth.\
\
      \'93No; but you've seen the others, dear.\'94\
\
      Soames gave her another look. What had she picked up? Had her\
      Aunt Winifred, or Imogen, or Val Dartie and his wife, been\
      talking? Every breath of the old scandal had been carefully kept\
      from her at home, and Winifred warned many times that he wouldn't\
      have a whisper of it reach her for the world. So far as she ought\
      to know, he had never been married before. But her dark eyes,\
      whose southern glint and clearness often almost frightened him,\
      met his with perfect innocence.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 he said, \'93your grandfather and his brother had a quarrel.\
      The two families don't know each other.\'94\
\
      \'93How romantic!\'94\
\
      'Now, what does she mean by that?' he thought. The word was to\
      him extravagant and dangerous\'97it was as if she had said: \'93How\
      jolly!\'94\
\
      \'93And they'll continue not to know each, other,\'94 he added, but\
      instantly regretted the challenge in those words. Fleur was\
      smiling. In this age, when young people prided themselves on\
      going their own ways and paying no attention to any sort of\
      decent prejudice, he had said the very thing to excite her\
      wilfulness. Then, recollecting the expression on Irene's face, he\
      breathed again.\
\
      \'93What sort of a quarrel?\'94 he heard Fleur say.\
\
      \'93About a house. It's ancient history for you. Your grandfather\
      died the day you were born. He was ninety.\'94\
\
      \'93Ninety? Are there many Forsytes besides those in the Red Book?\'94\
\
      \'93I don't know,\'94 said Soames. \'93They're all dispersed now. The old\
      ones are dead, except Timothy.\'94\
\
      Fleur clasped her hands.\
\
      \'93Timothy? Isn't that delicious?\'94\
\
      \'93Not at all,\'94 said Soames. It offended him that she should think\
      \'93Timothy\'94 delicious\'97a kind of insult to his breed. This new\
      generation mocked at anything solid and tenacious. \'93You go and\
      see the old boy. He might want to prophesy.\'94 Ah! If Timothy could\
      see the disquiet England of his great-nephews and great-nieces,\
      he would certainly give tongue. And involuntarily he glanced up\
      at the Iseeum; yes\'97George was still in the window, with the same\
      pink paper in his hand.\
\
      \'93Where is Robin Hill, Father?\'94\
\
      Robin Hill! Robin Hill, round which all that tragedy had centred!\
      What did she want to know for?\
\
      \'93In Surrey,\'94 he muttered; \'93not far from Richmond. Why?\'94\
\
      \'93Is the house there?\'94\
\
      \'93What house?\'94\
\
      \'93That they quarrelled about.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes. But what's all that to do with you? We're going home\
      to-morrow\'97you'd better be thinking about your frocks.\'94\
\
      \'93Bless you! They're all thought about. A family feud? It's like\
      the Bible, or Mark Twain\'97awfully exciting. What did you do in the\
      feud, Father?\'94\
\
      \'93Never you mind.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! But if I'm to keep it up?\'94\
\
      \'93Who said you were to keep it up?\'94\
\
      \'93You, darling.\'94\
\
      \'93I? I said it had nothing to do with you.\'94\
\
      \'93Just what I think, you know; so that's all right.\'94\
\
      She was too sharp for him; fine, as Annette sometimes called her.\
      Nothing for it but to distract her attention.\
\
      \'93There's a bit of rosaline point in here,\'94 he said, stopping\
      before a shop, \'93that I thought you might like.\'94\
\
      When he had paid for it and they had resumed their progress,\
      Fleur said:\
\
      \'93Don't you think that boy's mother is the most beautiful woman of\
      her age you've ever seen?\'94\
\
      Soames shivered. Uncanny, the way she stuck to it!\
\
      \'93I don't know that I noticed her.\'94\
\
      \'93Dear, I saw the corner of your eye.\'94\
\
      \'93You see everything\'97and a great deal more, it seems to me!\'94\
\
      \'93What's her husband like? He must be your first cousin, if your\
      fathers were brothers.\'94\
\
      \'93Dead, for all I know,\'94 said Soames, with sudden vehemence. \'93I\
      haven't seen him for twenty years.\'94\
\
      \'93What was he?\'94\
\
      \'93A painter.\'94\
\
      \'93That's quite jolly.\'94\
\
      The words: \'93If you want to please me you'll put those people out\
      of your head,\'94 sprang to Soames' lips, but he choked them back\'97he\
      must not let her see his feelings.\
\
      \'93He once insulted me,\'94 he said.\
\
      Her quick eyes rested on his face.\
\
      \'93I see! You didn't avenge it, and it rankles. Poor Father! You\
      let me have a go!\'94\
\
      It was really like lying in the dark with a mosquito hovering\
      above his face. Such pertinacity in Fleur was new to him, and, as\
      they reached the hotel, he said grimly:\
\
      \'93I did my best. And that's enough about these people. I'm going\
      up till dinner.\'94\
\
      \'93I shall sit here.\'94\
\
      With a parting look at her extended in a chair\'97a look\
      half-resentful, half-adoring\'97Soames moved into the lift and was\
      transported to their suite on the fourth floor. He stood by the\
      window of the sitting-room which gave view over Hyde Park, and\
      drummed a finger on its pane. His feelings were confused, tetchy,\
      troubled. The throb of that old wound, scarred over by Time and\
      new interests, was mingled with displeasure and anxiety, and a\
      slight pain in his chest where that nougat stuff had disagreed.\
      Had Annette come in? Not that she was any good to him in such a\
      difficulty. Whenever she had questioned him about his first\
      marriage, he had always shut her up; she knew nothing of it, save\
      that it had been the great passion of his life, and his marriage\
      with herself but domestic makeshift. She had always kept the\
      grudge of that up her sleeve, as it were, and used it\
      commercially. He listened. A sound\'97the vague murmur of a woman's\
      movements\'97was coming through the door. She was in. He tapped.\
\
      \'93Who?\'94\
\
      \'93I,\'94 said Soames.\
\
      She had been changing her frock, and was still imperfectly\
      clothed; a striking figure before her glass. There was a certain\
      magnificence about her arms, shoulders, hair, which had darkened\
      since he first knew her, about the turn of her neck, the\
      silkiness of her garments, her dark-lashed, greyblue eyes\'97she was\
      certainly as handsome at forty as she had ever been. A fine\
      possession, an excellent housekeeper, a sensible and affectionate\
      enough mother. If only she weren't always so frankly cynical\
      about the relations between them! Soames, who had no more real\
      affection for her than she had for him, suffered from a kind of\
      English grievance in that she had never dropped even the thinnest\
      veil of sentiment over their partnership. Like most of his\
      countrymen and women, he held the view that marriage should be\
      based on mutual love, but that when from a marriage love had\
      disappeared, or, been found never to have really existed\'97so that\
      it was manifestly not based on love\'97you must not admit it. There\
      it was, and the love was not\'97but there you were, and must\
      continue to be! Thus you had it both ways, and were not tarred\
      with cynicism, realism, and immorality like the French. Moreover,\
      it was necessary in the interests of property. He knew that she\
      knew that they both knew there was no love between them, but he\
      still expected her not to admit in words or conduct such a thing,\
      and he could never understand what she meant when she talked of\
      the hypocrisy of the English. He said:\
\
      \'93Whom have you got at 'The Shelter' next week?\'94\
\
      Annette went on touching her lips delicately with salve\'97he always\
      wished she wouldn't do that.\
\
      \'93Your sister Winifred, and the Car-r-digans\'94\'97she took up a tiny\
      stick of black\'97\'93and Prosper Profond.\'94\
\
      \'93That Belgian chap? Why him?\'94\
\
      Annette turned her neck lazily, touched one eyelash, and said:\
\
      \'93He amuses Winifred.\'94\
\
      \'93I want some one to amuse Fleur; she's restive.\'94\
\
      \'93R-restive?\'94 repeated Annette. \'93Is it the first time you see\
      that, my friend? She was born r-restive, as you call it.\'94\
\
      Would she never get that affected roll out of her r's?\
\
      He touched the dress she had taken off, and asked:\
\
      \'93What have you been doing?\'94\
\
      Annette looked at him, reflected in her glass. Her\
      just-brightened lips smiled, rather full, rather ironical.\
\
      \'93Enjoying myself,\'94 she said.\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 answered Soames glumly. \'93Ribbandry, I suppose.\'94\
\
      It was his word for all that incomprehensible running in and out\
      of shops that women went in for. \'93Has Fleur got her summer\
      dresses?\'94\
\
      \'93You don't ask if I have mine.\'94\
\
      \'93You don't care whether I do or not.\'94\
\
      \'93Quite right. Well, she has; and I have mine\'97terribly expensive.\'94\
\
      \'93H'm!\'94 said Soames. \'93What does that chap Profond do in England?\'94\
\
      Annette raised the eyebrows she had just finished.\
\
      \'93He yachts.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 said Soames; \'93he's a sleepy chap.\'94\
\
      \'93Sometimes,\'94 answered Annette, and her face had a sort of quiet\
      enjoyment. \'93But sometimes very amusing.\'94\
\
      \'93He's got a touch of the tar-brush about him.\'94\
\
      Annette stretched herself.\
\
      \'93Tar-brush?\'94 she said. \'93What is that? His mother was Armenienne.\'94\
\
      \'93That's it, then,\'94 muttered Soames. \'93Does he know anything about\
      pictures?\'94\
\
      \'93He knows about everything\'97a man of the world.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, get some one for Fleur. I want to distract her. She's\
      going off on Saturday to Val Dartie and his wife; I don't like\
      it.\'94\
\
      \'93Why not?\'94\
\
      Since the reason could not be explained without going into family\
      history, Soames merely answered:\
\
      \'93Racketing about. There's too much of it.\'94\
\
      \'93I like that little Mrs. Val; she is very quiet and clever.\'94\
\
      \'93I know nothing of her except\'97This thing's new.\'94 And Soames took\
      up a creation from the bed.\
\
      Annette received it from him.\
\
      \'93Would you hook me?\'94 she said.\
\
      Soames hooked. Glancing once over her shoulder into the glass, he\
      saw the expression on her face, faintly amused, faintly\
      contemptuous, as much as to say: \'93Thanks! You will never learn!\'94\
      No, thank God, he wasn't a Frenchman! He finished with a jerk,\
      and the words: \'93It's too low here.\'94 And he went to the door, with\
      the wish to get away from her and go down to Fleur again.\
\
      Annette stayed a powder-puff, and said with startling suddenness\
\
      \'93Que tu es grossier!\'94\
\
      He knew the expression\'97he had reason to. The first time she had\
      used it he had thought it meant \'93What a grocer you are!\'94 and had\
      not known whether to be relieved or not when better informed. He\
      resented the word\'97he was not coarse! If he was coarse, what was\
      that chap in the room beyond his, who made those horrible noises\
      in the morning when he cleared his throat, or those people in the\
      Lounge who thought it well-bred to say nothing but what the whole\
      world could hear at the top of their voices\'97quacking inanity!\
      Coarse, because he had said her dress was low! Well, so it was!\
      He went out without reply.\
\
      Coming into the Lounge from the far end, he at once saw Fleur\
      where he had left her. She sat with crossed knees, slowly\
      balancing a foot in silk stocking and grey shoe, sure sign that\
      she was dreaming. Her eyes showed it too\'97they went off like that\
      sometimes. And then, in a moment, she would come to life, and be\
      as quick and restless as a monkey. And she knew so much, so\
      self-assured, and not yet nineteen. What was that odious word?\
      Flapper! Dreadful young creatures\'97squealing and squawking and\
      showing their legs! The worst of them bad dreams, the best of\
      them powdered angels! Fleur was not a flapper, not one of those\
      slangy, ill-bred young females. And yet she was frighteningly\
      self-willed, and full of life, and determined to enjoy it. Enjoy!\
      The word brought no puritan terror to Soames; but it brought the\
      terror suited to his temperament. He had always been afraid to\
      enjoy to-day for fear he might not enjoy tomorrow so much. And it\
      was terrifying to feel that his daughter was divested of that\
      safeguard. The very way she sat in that chair showed it\'97lost in\
      her dream. He had never been lost in a dream himself\'97there was\
      nothing to be had out of it; and where she got it from he did not\
      know! Certainly not from Annette! And yet Annette, as a young\
      girl, when he was hanging about her, had once had a flowery look.\
      Well, she had lost it now!\
\
      Fleur rose from her chair-swiftly, restlessly; and flung herself\
      down at a writing-table. Seizing ink and writing paper, she began\
      to write as if she had not time to breathe before she got her\
      letter written. And suddenly she saw him. The air of desperate\
      absorption vanished, she smiled, waved a kiss, made a pretty face\
      as if she were a little puzzled and a little bored.\
\
      Ah! She was \'93fine\'94\'97\'93fine!\'94\
\
\
\
\
      III.\'97AT ROBIN HILL\
\
      Jolyon Forsyte had spent his boy's nineteenth birthday at Robin\
      Hill, quietly going into his affairs. He did everything quietly\
      now, because his heart was in a poor way, and, like all his\
      family, he disliked the idea of dying. He had never realised how\
      much till one day, two years ago, he had gone to his doctor about\
      certain symptoms, and been told:\
\
      \'93At any moment, on any overstrain.\'94\
\
      He had taken it with a smile\'97the natural Forsyte reaction against\
      an unpleasant truth. But with an increase of symptoms in the\
      train on the way home, he had realised to the full the sentence\
      hanging over him. To leave Irene, his boy, his home, his\
      work\'97though he did little enough work now! To leave them for\
      unknown darkness, for the unimaginable state, for such\
      nothingness that he would not even be conscious of wind stirring\
      leaves above his grave, nor of the scent of earth and grass. Of\
      such nothingness that, however hard he might try to conceive it,\
      he never could, and must still hover on the hope that he might\
      see again those he loved! To realise this was to endure very\
      poignant spiritual anguish. Before he reached home that day he\
      had determined to keep it from Irene. He would have to be more\
      careful than man had ever been, for the least thing would give it\
      away and make her as wretched as himself, almost. His doctor had\
      passed him sound in other respects, and seventy was nothing of an\
      age\'97he would last a long time yet, if he could.\
\
      Such a conclusion, followed out for nearly two years, develops to\
      the full the subtler side of character. Naturally not abrupt,\
      except when nervously excited, Jolyon had become control\
      incarnate. The sad patience of old people who cannot exert\
      themselves was masked by a smile which his lips preserved even in\
      private. He devised continually all manner of cover to conceal\
      his enforced lack of exertion.\
\
      Mocking himself for so doing, he counterfeited conversion to the\
      Simple Life; gave up wine and cigars, drank a special kind of\
      coffee with no coffee in it. In short, he made himself as safe as\
      a Forsyte in his condition could, under the rose of his mild\
      irony. Secure from discovery, since his wife and son had gone up\
      to Town, he had spent the fine May day quietly arranging his\
      papers, that he might die to-morrow without inconveniencing any\
      one, giving in fact a final polish to his terrestrial state.\
      Having docketed and enclosed it in his father's old Chinese\
      cabinet, he put the key into an envelope, wrote the words\
      outside: \'93Key of the Chinese cabinet, wherein will be found the\
      exact state of me, J. F.,\'94 and put it in his breast-pocket, where\
      it would be always about him, in case of accident. Then, ringing\
      for tea, he went out to have it under the old oak-tree.\
\
      All are under sentence of death; Jolyon, whose sentence was but a\
      little more precise and pressing, had become so used to it that\
      he thought habitually, like other people, of other things. He\
      thought of his son now.\
\
      Jon was nineteen that day, and Jon had come of late to a\
      decision. Educated neither at Eton like his father, nor at\
      Harrow, like his dead half-brother, but at one of those\
      establishments which, designed to avoid the evil and contain the\
      good of the Public School system, may or may not contain the evil\
      and avoid the good, Jon had left in April perfectly ignorant of\
      what he wanted to become. The War, which had promised to go on\
      for ever, had ended just as he was about to join the Army, six\
      months before his time. It had taken him ever since to get used\
      to the idea that he could now choose for himself. He had held\
      with his father several discussions, from which, under a cheery\
      show of being ready for anything\'97except, of course, the Church,\
      Army, Law, Stage, Stock Exchange, Medicine, Business, and\
      Engineering\'97Jolyon had gathered rather clearly that Jon wanted to\
      go in for nothing. He himself had felt exactly like that at the\
      same age. With him that pleasant vacuity had soon been ended by\
      an early marriage, and its unhappy consequences. Forced to become\
      an underwriter at Lloyd's, he had regained prosperity before his\
      artistic talent had outcropped. But having\'97as the simple\
      say\'97\'93learned\'94 his boy to draw pigs and other animals, he knew\
      that Jon would never be a painter, and inclined to the conclusion\
      that his aversion from everything else meant that he was going to\
      be a writer. Holding, however, the view that experience was\
      necessary even for that profession, there seemed to Jolyon\
      nothing in the meantime, for Jon, but University, travel, and\
      perhaps the eating of dinners for the Bar. After that one would\
      see, or more probably one would not. In face of these proffered\
      allurements, however, Jon had remained undecided.\
\
      Such discussions with his son had confirmed in Jolyon a doubt\
      whether the world had really changed. People said that it was a\
      new age. With the profundity of one not too long for any age,\
      Jolyon perceived that under slightly different surfaces the era\
      was precisely what it had been. Mankind was still divided into\
      two species: The few who had \'93speculation\'94 in their souls, and\
      the many who had none, with a belt of hybrids like himself in the\
      middle. Jon appeared to have speculation; it seemed to his father\
      a bad lookout.\
\
      With something deeper, therefore, than his usual smile, he had\
      heard the boy say, a fortnight ago: \'93I should like to try\
      farming, Dad; if it won't cost you too much. It seems to be about\
      the only sort of life that doesn't hurt anybody; except art, and\
      of course that's out of the question for me.\'94\
\
      Jolyon subdued his smile, and answered:\
\
      \'93All right; you shall skip back to where we were under the first\
      Jolyon in 1760. It'll prove the cycle theory, and incidentally,\
      no doubt, you may grow a better turnip than he did.\'94\
\
      A little dashed, Jon had answered:\
\
      \'93But don't you think it's a good scheme, Dad?\'94\
\
      \'93'Twill serve, my dear; and if you should really take to it,\
      you'll do more good than most men, which is little enough.\'94\
\
      To himself, however, he had said: 'But he won't take to it. I\
      give him four years. Still, it's healthy, and harmless.'\
\
      After turning the matter over and consulting with Irene, he wrote\
      to his daughter, Mrs. Val Dartie, asking if they knew of a farmer\
      near them on the Downs who would take Jon as an apprentice.\
      Holly's answer had been enthusiastic. There was an excellent man\
      quite close; she and Val would love Jon to live with them.\
\
      The boy was due to go to-morrow.\
\
      Sipping weak tea with lemon in it, Jolyon gazed through the\
      leaves of the old oak-tree at that view which had appeared to him\
      desirable for thirty-two years. The tree beneath which he sat\
      seemed not a day older! So young, the little leaves of brownish\
      gold; so old, the whitey-grey-green of its thick rough trunk. A\
      tree of memories, which would live on hundreds of years yet,\
      unless some barbarian cut it down\'97would see old England out at\
      the pace things were going! He remembered a night three years\
      before, when, looking from his window, with his arm close round\
      Irene, he had watched a German aeroplane hovering, it seemed,\
      right over the old tree. Next day they had found a bomb hole in a\
      field on Gage's farm. That was before he knew that he was under\
      sentence of death. He could almost have wished the bomb had\
      finished him. It would have saved a lot of hanging about, many\
      hours of cold fear in the pit of his stomach. He had counted on\
      living to the normal Forsyte age of eighty-five or more, when\
      Irene would be seventy. As it was, she would miss him. Still\
      there was Jon, more important in her life than himself; Jon, who\
      adored his mother.\
\
      Under that tree, where old Jolyon\'97waiting for Irene to come to\
      him across the lawn\'97had breathed his last, Jolyon wondered,\
      whimsically, whether, having put everything in such perfect\
      order, he had not better close his own eyes and drift away. There\
      was something undignified in parasitically clinging on to the\
      effortless close of a life wherein he regretted two things\
      only\'97the long division between his father and himself when he was\
      young, and the lateness of his union with Irene.\
\
      From where he sat he could see a cluster of apple-trees in\
      blossom. Nothing in Nature moved him so much as fruit-trees in\
      blossom; and his heart ached suddenly because he might never see\
      them flower again. Spring! Decidedly no man ought to have to die\
      while his heart was still young enough to love beauty! Blackbirds\
      sang recklessly in the shrubbery, swallows were flying high, the\
      leaves above him glistened; and over the fields was every\
      imaginable tint of early foliage, burnished by the level\
      sunlight, away to where the distant \'93smoke-bush\'94 blue was trailed\
      along the horizon. Irene's flowers in their narrow beds had\
      startling individuality that evening, little deep assertions of\
      gay life. Only Chinese and Japanese painters, and perhaps\
      Leonardo, had known how to get that startling little ego into\
      each painted flower, and bird, and beast\'97the ego, yet the sense\
      of species, the universality of life as well. They were the\
      fellows! 'I've made nothing that will live!' thought Jolyon;\
      'I've been an amateur\'97a mere lover, not a creator. Still, I shall\
      leave Jon behind me when I go.' What luck that the boy had not\
      been caught by that ghastly war! He might so easily have been\
      killed, like poor Jolly twenty years ago out in the Transvaal.\
      Jon would do something some day\'97if the Age didn't spoil him\'97an\
      imaginative chap! His whim to take up farming was but a bit of\
      sentiment, and about as likely to last. And just then he saw them\
      coming up the field: Irene and the boy; walking from the station,\
      with their arms linked. And getting up, he strolled down through\
      the new rose garden to meet them....\
\
      Irene came into his room that night and sat down by the window.\
      She sat there without speaking till he said:\
\
      \'93What is it, my love?\'94\
\
      \'93We had an encounter to-day.\'94\
\
      \'93With whom?\'94\
\
      \'93Soames.\'94\
\
      Soames! He had kept that name out of his thoughts these last two\
      years; conscious that it was bad for him. And, now, his heart\
      moved in a disconcerting manner, as if it had side-slipped within\
      his chest.\
\
      Irene went on quietly:\
\
      \'93He and his daughter were in the Gallery, and afterward at the\
      confectioner's where we had tea.\'94\
\
      Jolyon went over and put his hand on her shoulder.\
\
      \'93How did he look?\'94\
\
      \'93Grey; but otherwise much the same.\'94\
\
      \'93And the daughter?\'94\
\
      \'93Pretty. At least, Jon thought so.\'94\
\
      Jolyon's heart side-slipped again. His wife's face had a strained\
      and puzzled look.\
\
      \'93You didn't-?\'94 he began.\
\
      \'93No; but Jon knows their name. The girl dropped her handkerchief\
      and he picked it up.\'94\
\
      Jolyon sat down on his bed. An evil chance!\
\
      \'93June was with you. Did she put her foot into it?\'94\
\
      \'93No; but it was all very queer and strained, and Jon could see it\
      was.\'94\
\
      Jolyon drew a long breath, and said:\
\
      \'93I've often wondered whether we've been right to keep it from\
      him. He'll find out some day.\'94\
\
      \'93The later the better, Jolyon; the young have such cheap, hard\
      judgment. When you were nineteen what would you have thought of\
      your mother if she had done what I have?\'94\
\
      Yes! There it was! Jon worshipped his mother; and knew nothing of\
      the tragedies, the inexorable necessities of life, nothing of the\
      prisoned grief in an unhappy marriage, nothing of jealousy or\
      passion\'97knew nothing at all, as yet!\
\
      \'93What have you told him?\'94 he said at last.\
\
      \'93That they were relations, but we didn't know them; that you had\
      never cared much for your family, or they for you. I expect he\
      will be asking you.\'94\
\
      Jolyon smiled. \'93This promises to take the place of air-raids,\'94 he\
      said. \'93After all, one misses them.\'94\
\
      Irene looked up at him.\
\
      \'93We've known it would come some day.\'94\
\
      He answered her with sudden energy:\
\
      \'93I could never stand seeing Jon blame you. He shan't do that,\
      even in thought. He has imagination; and he'll understand if it's\
      put to him properly. I think I had better tell him before he gets\
      to know otherwise.\'94\
\
      \'93Not yet, Jolyon.\'94\
\
      That was like her\'97she had no foresight, and never went to meet\
      trouble. Still\'97who knew?\'97she might be right. It was ill going\
      against a mother's instinct. It might be well to let the boy go\
      on, if possible, till experience had given him some touchstone by\
      which he could judge the values of that old tragedy; till love,\
      jealousy, longing, had deepened his charity. All the same, one\
      must take precautions\'97every precaution possible! And, long after\
      Irene had left him, he lay awake turning over those precautions.\
      He must write to Holly, telling her that Jon knew nothing as yet\
      of family history. Holly was discreet, she would make sure of her\
      husband, she would see to it! Jon could take the letter with him\
      when he went to-morrow.\
\
      And so the day on which he had put the polish on his material\
      estate died out with the chiming of the stable clock; and another\
      began for Jolyon in the shadow of a spiritual disorder which\
      could not be so rounded off and polished....\
\
      But Jon, whose room had once been his day nursery, lay awake too,\
      the prey of a sensation disputed by those who have never known\
      it, \'93love at first sight!\'94 He had felt it beginning in him with\
      the glint of those dark eyes gazing into his athwart the Juno\'97a\
      conviction that this was his 'dream'. so that what followed had\
      seemed to him at once natural and miraculous. Fleur! Her name\
      alone was almost enough for one who was terribly susceptible to\
      the charm of words. In a homoeopathic Age, when boys and girls\
      were co-educated, and mixed up in early life till sex was almost\
      abolished, Jon was singularly old-fashioned. His modern school\
      took boys only, and his holidays had been spent at Robin Hill\
      with boy friends, or his parents alone. He had never, therefore,\
      been inoculated against the germs of love by small doses of the\
      poison. And now in the dark his temperature was mounting fast. He\
      lay awake, featuring Fleur\'97as they called it\'97recalling her words,\
      especially that \'93Au revoir!\'94 so soft and sprightly.\
\
      He was still so wide awake at dawn that he got up, slipped on\
      tennis shoes, trousers, and a sweater, and in silence crept\
      downstairs and out through the study window. It was just light;\
      there was a smell of grass. 'Fleur!' he thought; 'Fleur!' It was\
      mysteriously white out of doors, with nothing awake except the\
      birds just beginning to chirp. 'I'll go down into the coppice,'\
      he thought. He ran down through the fields, reached the pond just\
      as the sun rose, and passed into the coppice. Bluebells carpeted\
      the ground there; among the larch-trees there was mystery\'97the\
      air, as it were, composed of that romantic quality. Jon sniffed\
      its freshness, and stared at the bluebells in the sharpening\
      light. Fleur! It rhymed with her! And she lived at Mapleduram\'97a\
      jolly name, too, on the river somewhere. He could find it in the\
      atlas presently. He would write to her. But would she answer? Oh!\
      She must. She had said \'93Au revoir!\'94 Not good-bye! What luck that\
      she had dropped her handkerchief! He would never have known her\
      but for that. And the more he thought of that handkerchief, the\
      more amazing his luck seemed. Fleur! It certainly rhymed with\
      her! Rhythm thronged his head; words jostled to be joined\
      together; he was on the verge of a poem.\
\
      Jon remained in this condition for more than half an hour, then\
      returned to the house, and getting a ladder, climbed in at his\
      bedroom window out of sheer exhilaration. Then, remembering that\
      the study window was open, he went down and shut it, first\
      removing the ladder, so as to obliterate all traces of his\
      feeling. The thing was too deep to be revealed to mortal\
      soul-even-to his mother.\
\
\
\
\
      IV.\'97THE MAUSOLEUM\
\
      There are houses whose souls have passed into the limbo of Time,\
      leaving their bodies in the limbo of London. Such was not quite\
      the condition of \'93Timothy's\'94 on the Bayswater Road, for Timothy's\
      soul still had one foot in Timothy Forsyte's body, and Smither\
      kept the atmosphere unchanging, of camphor and port wine and\
      house whose windows are only opened to air it twice a day.\
\
      To Forsyte imagination that house was now a sort of Chinese\
      pill-box, a series of layers in the last of which was Timothy.\
      One did not reach him, or so it was reported by members of the\
      family who, out of old-time habit or absentmindedness, would\
      drive up once in a blue moon and ask after their surviving uncle.\
      Such were Francie, now quite emancipated from God (she frankly\
      avowed atheism), Euphemia, emancipated from old Nicholas, and\
      Winifred Dartie from her \'93man of the world.\'94 But, after all,\
      everybody was emancipated now, or said they were\'97perhaps not\
      quite the same thing!\
\
      When Soames, therefore, took it on his way to Paddington station\
      on the morning after that encounter, it was hardly with the\
      expectation of seeing Timothy in the flesh. His heart made a\
      faint demonstration within him while he stood in full south\
      sunlight on the newly whitened doorstep of that little house\
      where four Forsytes had once lived, and now but one dwelt on like\
      a winter fly; the house into which Soames had come and out of\
      which he had gone times without number, divested of, or burdened\
      with, fardels of family gossip; the house of the \'93old people\'94 of\
      another century, another age.\
\
      The sight of Smither\'97still corseted up to the armpits because the\
      new fashion which came in as they were going out about 1903 had\
      never been considered \'93nice\'94 by Aunts Juley and Hester\'97brought a\
      pale friendliness to Soames' lips; Smither, still faithfully\
      arranged to old pattern in every detail, an invaluable\
      servant\'97none such left\'97smiling back at him, with the words: \'93Why!\
      it's Mr. Soames, after all this time! And how are you, sir? Mr.\
      Timothy will be so pleased to know you've been.\'94\
\
      \'93How is he?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! he keeps fairly bobbish for his age, sir; but of course he's\
      a wonderful man. As I said to Mrs. Dartie when she was here last:\
      It would please Miss Forsyte and Mrs. Juley and Miss Hester to\
      see how he relishes a baked apple still. But he's quite deaf. And\
      a mercy, I always think. For what we should have done with him in\
      the air-raids, I don't know.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 said Soames. \'93What did you do with him?\'94\
\
      \'93We just left him in his bed, and had the bell run down into the\
      cellar, so that Cook and I could hear him if he rang. It would\
      never have done to let him know there was a war on. As I said to\
      Cook, 'If Mr. Timothy rings, they may do what they like\'97I'm going\
      up. My dear mistresses would have a fit if they could see him\
      ringing and nobody going to him.' But he slept through them all\
      beautiful. And the one in the daytime he was having his bath. It\
      was a mercy, because he might have noticed the people in the\
      street all looking up\'97he often looks out of the window.\'94\
\
      \'93Quite!\'94 murmured Soames. Smither was getting garrulous! \'93I just\
      want to look round and see if there's anything to be done.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, sir. I don't think there's anything except a smell of mice\
      in the dining-room that we don't know how to get rid of. It's\
      funny they should be there, and not a crumb, since Mr. Timothy\
      took to not coming down, just before the War. But they're nasty\
      little things; you never know where they'll take you next.\'94\
\
      \'93Does he leave his bed?\'94\'97\
\
      \'93Oh! yes, sir; he takes nice exercise between his bed and the\
      window in the morning, not to risk a change of air. And he's\
      quite comfortable in himself; has his Will out every day regular.\
      It's a great consolation to him\'97that.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, Smither, I want to see him, if I can; in case he has\
      anything to say to me.\'94\
\
      Smither coloured up above her corsets.\
\
      \'93It will be an occasion!\'94 she said. \'93Shall I take you round the\
      house, sir, while I send Cook to break it to him?\'94\
\
      \'93No, you go to him,\'94 said Soames. \'93I can go round the house by\
      myself.\'94\
\
      One could not confess to sentiment before another, and Soames\
      felt that he was going to be sentimental nosing round those rooms\
      so saturated with the past. When Smither, creaking with\
      excitement, had left him, Soames entered the dining-room and\
      sniffed. In his opinion it wasn't mice, but incipient wood-rot,\
      and he examined the panelling. Whether it was worth a coat of\
      paint, at Timothy's age, he was not sure. The room had always\
      been the most modern in the house; and only a faint smile curled\
      Soames' lips and nostrils. Walls of a rich green surmounted the\
      oak dado; a heavy metal chandelier hung by a chain from a ceiling\
      divided by imitation beams. The pictures had been bought by\
      Timothy, a bargain, one day at Jobson's sixty years ago\'97three\
      Snyder \'93still lifes,\'94 two faintly coloured drawings of a boy and\
      a girl, rather charming, which bore the initials \'93J. R.\'94\'97Timothy\
      had always believed they might turn out to be Joshua Reynolds,\
      but Soames, who admired them, had discovered that they were only\
      John Robinson; and a doubtful Morland of a white pony being shod.\
      Deep-red plush curtains, ten high-backed dark mahogany chairs\
      with deep-red plush seats, a Turkey carpet, and a mahogany\
      dining-table as large as the room was small, such was an\
      apartment which Soames could remember unchanged in soul or body\
      since he was four years old. He looked especially at the two\
      drawings, and thought: 'I shall buy those at the sale.'\
\
      From the dining-room he passed into Timothy's study. He did not\
      remember ever having been in that room. It was lined from floor\
      to ceiling with volumes, and he looked at them with curiosity.\
      One wall seemed devoted to educational books, which Timothy's\
      firm had published two generations back-sometimes as many as\
      twenty copies of one book. Soames read their titles and\
      shuddered. The middle wall had precisely the same books as used\
      to be in the library at his own father's in Park Lane, from which\
      he deduced the fancy that James and his youngest brother had gone\
      out together one day and bought a brace of small libraries. The\
      third wall he approached with more excitement. Here, surely,\
      Timothy's own taste would be found. It was. The books were\
      dummies. The fourth wall was all heavily curtained window. And\
      turned toward it was a large chair with a mahogany reading-stand\
      attached, on which a yellowish and folded copy of The Times,\
      dated July 6, 1914, the day Timothy first failed to come down, as\
      if in preparation for the War, seemed waiting for him still. In a\
      corner stood a large globe of that world never visited by\
      Timothy, deeply convinced of the unreality of everything but\
      England, and permanently upset by the sea, on which he had been\
      very sick one Sunday afternoon in 1836, out of a pleasure boat\
      off the pier at Brighton, with Juley and Hester, Swithin and\
      Hatty Chessman; all due to Swithin, who was always taking things\
      into his head, and who, thank goodness, had been sick too. Soames\
      knew all about it, having heard the tale fifty times at least\
      from one or other of them. He went up to the globe, and gave it a\
      spin; it emitted a faint creak and moved about an inch, bringing\
      into his purview a daddy-long-legs which had died on it in\
      latitude 44.\
\
      'Mausoleum!' he thought. 'George was right!' And he went out and\
      up the stairs. On the half-landing he stopped before the case of\
      stuffed humming-birds which had delighted his childhood. They\
      looked not a day older, suspended on wires above pampas-grass. If\
      the case were opened the birds would not begin to hum, but the\
      whole thing would crumble, he suspected. It wouldn't be worth\
      putting that into the sale! And suddenly he was caught by a\
      memory of Aunt Ann\'97dear old Aunt Ann\'97holding him by the hand in\
      front of that case and saying: \'93Look, Soamey! Aren't they bright\
      and pretty, dear little humming-birds!\'94 Soames remembered his own\
      answer: \'93They don't hum, Auntie.\'94 He must have been six, in a\
      black velveteen suit with a light-blue collar-he remembered that\
      suit well! Aunt Ann with her ringlets, and her spidery kind\
      hands, and her grave old aquiline smile\'97a fine old lady, Aunt\
      Ann! He moved on up to the drawing-room door. There on each side\
      of it were the groups of miniatures. Those he would certainly buy\
      in! The miniatures of his four aunts, one of his Uncle Swithin\
      adolescent, and one of his Uncle Nicholas as a boy. They had all\
      been painted by a young lady friend of the family at a time,\
      1830, about, when miniatures were considered very genteel, and\
      lasting too, painted as they were on ivory. Many a time had he\
      heard the tale of that young lady: \'93Very talented, my dear; she\
      had quite a weakness for Swithin, and very soon after she went\
      into a consumption and died: so like Keats\'97we often spoke of it.\'94\
\
      Well, there they were! Ann, Juley, Hester, Susan\'97quite a small\
      child; Swithin, with sky-blue eyes, pink cheeks, yellow curls,\
      white waistcoat-large as life; and Nicholas, like Cupid with an\
      eye on heaven. Now he came to think of it, Uncle Nick had always\
      been rather like that\'97a wonderful man to the last. Yes, she must\
      have had talent, and miniatures always had a certain back-watered\
      cachet of their own, little subject to the currents of\
      competition on aesthetic Change. Soames opened the drawing-room\
      door. The room was dusted, the furniture uncovered, the curtains\
      drawn back, precisely as if his aunts still dwelt there patiently\
      waiting. And a thought came to him: When Timothy died\'97why not?\
      Would it not be almost a duty to preserve this house\'97like\
      Carlyle's\'97and put up a tablet, and show it? \'93Specimen of\
      mid-Victorian abode\'97entrance, one shilling, with catalogue.\'94\
      After all, it was the completest thing, and perhaps the deadest\
      in the London of to-day. Perfect in its special taste and\
      culture, if, that is, he took down and carried over to his own\
      collection the four Barbizon pictures he had given them. The\
      still sky-blue walls, tile green curtains patterned with red\
      flowers and ferns; the crewel-worked fire-screen before the\
      cast-iron grate; the mahogany cupboard with glass windows, full\
      of little knickknacks; the beaded footstools; Keats, Shelley,\
      Southey, Cowper, Coleridge, Byron's Corsair (but nothing else),\
      and the Victorian poets in a bookshelf row; the marqueterie\
      cabinet lined with dim red plush, full of family relics: Hester's\
      first fan; the buckles of their mother's father's shoes; three\
      bottled scorpions; and one very yellow elephant's tusk, sent home\
      from India by Great-uncle Edgar Forsyte, who had been in jute; a\
      yellow bit of paper propped up, with spidery writing on it,\
      recording God knew what! And the pictures crowding on the\
      walls\'97all water-colours save those four Barbizons looking like\
      the foreigners they were, and doubtful customers at that\'97pictures\
      bright and illustrative, \'93Telling the Bees,\'94 \'93Hey for the Ferry!\'94\
      and two in the style of Frith, all thimblerig and crinolines,\
      given them by Swithin. Oh! many, many pictures at which Soames\
      had gazed a thousand times in supercilious fascination; a\
      marvellous collection of bright, smooth gilt frames.\
\
      And the boudoir-grand piano, beautifully dusted, hermetically\
      sealed as ever; and Aunt Juley's album of pressed seaweed on it.\
      And the gilt-legged chairs, stronger than they looked. And on one\
      side of the fireplace the sofa of crimson silk, where Aunt Ann,\
      and after her Aunt Juley, had been wont to sit, facing the light\
      and bolt upright. And on the other side of the fire the one\
      really easy chair, back to the light, for Aunt Hester. Soames\
      screwed up his eyes; he seemed to see them sitting there. Ah! and\
      the atmosphere\'97even now, of too many stuffs and washed lace\
      curtains, lavender in bags, and dried bees' wings. 'No,' he\
      thought, 'there's nothing like it left; it ought to be\
      preserved.' And, by George, they might laugh at it, but for a\
      standard of gentle life never departed from, for fastidiousness\
      of skin and eye and nose and feeling, it beat to-day\
      hollow\'97to-day with its Tubes and cars, its perpetual smoking, its\
      cross-legged, bare-necked girls visible up to the knees and down\
      to the waist if you took the trouble (agreeable to the satyr\
      within each Forsyte but hardly his idea of a lady), with their\
      feet, too, screwed round the legs of their chairs while they ate,\
      and their \'93So longs,\'94 and their \'93Old Beans,\'94 and their\
      laughter\'97girls who gave him the shudders whenever he thought of\
      Fleur in contact with them; and the hard-eyed, capable, older\
      women who managed life and gave him the shudders too. No! his old\
      aunts, if they never opened their minds, their eyes, or very much\
      their windows, at least had manners, and a standard, and\
      reverence for past and future.\
\
      With rather a choky feeling he closed the door and went tiptoeing\
      upstairs. He looked in at a place on the way: H'm! in perfect\
      order of the eighties, with a sort of yellow oilskin paper on the\
      walls. At the top of the stairs he hesitated between four doors.\
      Which of them was Timothy's? And he listened. A sound, as of a\
      child slowly dragging a hobby-horse about, came to his ears. That\
      must be Timothy! He tapped, and a door was opened by Smither,\
      very red in the face.\
\
      Mr. Timothy was taking his walk, and she had not been able to get\
      him to attend. If Mr. Soames would come into the back-room, he\
      could see him through the door.\
\
      Soames went into the back-room and stood watching.\
\
      The last of the old Forsytes was on his feet, moving with the\
      most impressive slowness, and an air of perfect concentration on\
      his own affairs, backward and forward between the foot of his bed\
      and the window, a distance of some twelve feet. The lower part of\
      his square face, no longer clean-shaven, was covered with snowy\
      beard clipped as short as it could be, and his chin looked as\
      broad as his brow where the hair was also quite white, while nose\
      and cheeks and brow were a good yellow. One hand held a stout\
      stick, and the other grasped the skirt of his Jaeger\
      dressing-gown, from under which could be seen his bed-socked\
      ankles and feet thrust into Jaeger slippers. The expression on\
      his face was that of a crossed child, intent on something that he\
      has not got. Each time he turned he stumped the stick, and then\
      dragged it, as if to show that he could do without it:\
\
      \'93He still looks strong,\'94 said Soames under his breath.\
\
      \'93Oh! yes, sir. You should see him take his bath\'97it's wonderful;\
      he does enjoy it so.\'94\
\
      Those quite loud words gave Soames an insight. Timothy had\
      resumed his babyhood.\
\
      \'93Does he take any interest in things generally?\'94 he said, also\
      loud.\
\
      \'93Oh! yes, sir; his food and his Will. It's quite a sight to see\
      him turn it over and over, not to read it, of course; and every\
      now and then he asks the price of Consols, and I write it on a\
      slate for him\'97very large. Of course, I always write the same,\
      what they were when he last took notice, in 1914. We got the\
      doctor to forbid him to read the paper when the War broke out.\
      Oh! he did take on about that at first. But he soon came round,\
      because he knew it tired him; and he's a wonder to conserve\
      energy as he used to call it when my dear mistresses were alive,\
      bless their hearts! How he did go on at them about that; they\
      were always so active, if you remember, Mr. Soames.\'94\
\
      \'93What would happen if I were to go in?\'94 asked Soames: \'93Would he\
      remember me? I made his Will, you know, after Miss Hester died in\
      1907.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! that, sir,\'94 replied Smither doubtfully, \'93I couldn't take on\
      me to say. I think he might; he really is a wonderful man for his\
      age.\'94\
\
      Soames moved into the doorway, and waiting for Timothy to turn,\
      said in a loud voice: \'93Uncle Timothy!\'94\
\
      Timothy trailed back half-way, and halted.\
\
      \'93Eh?\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93Soames,\'94 cried Soames at the top of his voice, holding out his\
      hand, \'93Soames Forsyte!\'94\
\
      \'93No!\'94 said Timothy, and stumping his stick loudly on the floor,\
      he continued his walk.\
\
      \'93It doesn't seem to work,\'94 said Soames.\
\
      \'93No, sir,\'94 replied Smither, rather crestfallen; \'93you see, he\
      hasn't finished his walk. It always was one thing at a time with\
      him. I expect he'll ask me this afternoon if you came about the\
      gas, and a pretty job I shall have to make him understand.\'94\
\
      \'93Do you think he ought to have a man about him?\'94\
\
      Smither held up her hands. \'93A man! Oh! no. Cook and me can manage\
      perfectly. A strange man about would send him crazy in no time.\
      And my mistresses wouldn't like the idea of a man in the house.\
      Besides, we're so\'97proud of him.\'94\
\
      \'93I suppose the doctor comes?\'94\
\
      \'93Every morning. He makes special terms for such a quantity, and\
      Mr. Timothy's so used, he doesn't take a bit of notice, except to\
      put out his tongue.\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Soames, turning away, \'93it's rather sad and painful\
      to me.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! sir,\'94 returned Smither anxiously, \'93you mustn't think that.\
      Now that he can't worry about things, he quite enjoys his life,\
      really he does. As I say to Cook, Mr. Timothy is more of a man\
      than he ever was. You see, when he's not walkin', or takin' his\
      bath, he's eatin', and when he's not eatin', he's sleepin'. and\
      there it is. There isn't an ache or a care about him anywhere.\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Soames, \'93there's something in that. I'll go down. By\
      the way, let me see his Will.\'94\
\
      \'93I should have to take my time about that, sir; he keeps it under\
      his pillow, and he'd see me, while he's active.\'94\
\
      \'93I only want to know if it's the one I made,\'94 said Soames; \'93you\
      take a look at its date some time, and let me know.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, sir; but I'm sure it's the same, because me and Cook\
      witnessed, you remember, and there's our names on it still, and\
      we've only done it once.\'94\
\
      \'93Quite,\'94 said Soames. He did remember. Smither and Jane had been\
      proper witnesses, having been left nothing in the Will that they\
      might have no interest in Timothy's death. It had been\'97he fully\
      admitted\'97an almost improper precaution, but Timothy had wished\
      it, and, after all, Aunt Hester had provided for them amply.\
\
      \'93Very well,\'94 he said; \'93good-bye, Smither. Look after him, and if\
      he should say anything at any time, put it down, and let me\
      know.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! yes, Mr. Soames; I'll be sure to do that. It's been such a\
      pleasant change to see you. Cook will be quite excited when I\
      tell her.\'94\
\
      Soames shook her hand and went down-stairs. He stood for fully\
      two minutes by the hat-stand whereon he had hung his hat so many\
      times. 'So it all passes,' he was thinking; 'passes and begins\
      again. Poor old chap!' And he listened, if perchance the sound of\
      Timothy trailing his hobby-horse might come down the well of the\
      stairs; or some ghost of an old face show over the bannisters,\
      and an old voice say: 'Why, it's dear Soames, and we were only\
      saying that we hadn't seen him for a week!'\
\
      Nothing\'97nothing! Just the scent of camphor, and dust-motes in a\
      sunbeam through the fanlight over the door. The little old house!\
      A mausoleum! And, turning on his heel, he went out, and caught\
      his train.\
\
\
\
\
      V.\'97THE NATIVE HEATH\
          \'93His foot's upon his native heath, His name's\'97Val Dartie.\'94\
\
      With some such feeling did Val Dartie, in the fortieth year of\
      his age, set out that same Thursday morning very early from the\
      old manor-house he had taken on the north side of the Sussex\
      Downs. His destination was Newmarket, and he had not been there\
      since the autumn of 1899, when he stole over from Oxford for the\
      Cambridgeshire. He paused at the door to give his wife a kiss,\
      and put a flask of port into his pocket.\
\
      \'93Don't overtire your leg, Val, and don't bet too much.\'94\
\
      With the pressure of her chest against his own, and her eyes\
      looking into his, Val felt both leg and pocket safe. He should be\
      moderate; Holly was always right\'97she had a natural aptitude. It\
      did not seem so remarkable to him, perhaps, as it might to\
      others, that\'97half Dartie as he was\'97he should have been perfectly\
      faithful to his young first cousin during the twenty years since\
      he married her romantically out in the Boer War; and faithful\
      without any feeling of sacrifice or boredom\'97she was so quick, so\
      slyly always a little in front of his mood. Being first cousins\
      they had decided, rather needlessly, to have no children; and,\
      though a little sallower, she had kept her looks, her slimness,\
      and the colour of her dark hair. Val particularly admired the\
      life of her own she carried on, besides carrying on his, and\
      riding better every year. She kept up her music, she read an\
      awful lot\'97novels, poetry, all sorts of stuff. Out on their farm\
      in Cape colony she had looked after all the \'93nigger\'94 babies and\
      women in a miraculous manner. She was, in fact, clever; yet made\
      no fuss about it, and had no \'93side.\'94 Though not remarkable for\
      humility, Val had come to have the feeling that she was his\
      superior, and he did not grudge it\'97a great tribute. It might be\
      noted that he never looked at Holly without her knowing of it,\
      but that she looked at him sometimes unawares.\
\
      He had kissed her in the porch because he should not be doing so\
      on the platform, though she was going to the station with him, to\
      drive the car back. Tanned and wrinkled by Colonial weather and\
      the wiles inseparable from horses, and handicapped by the leg\
      which, weakened in the Boer War, had probably saved his life in\
      the War just past, Val was still much as he had been in the days\
      of his courtship; his smile as wide and charming, his eyelashes,\
      if anything, thicker and darker, his eyes screwed up under them,\
      as bright a grey, his freckles rather deeper, his hair a little\
      grizzled at the sides. He gave the impression of one who has\
      lived actively with horses in a sunny climate.\
\
      Twisting the car sharp round at the gate, he said:\
\
      \'93When is young Jon coming?\'94\
\
      \'93To-day.\'94\
\
      \'93Is there anything you want for him? I could bring it down on\
      Saturday.\'94\
\
      \'93No; but you might come by the same train as Fleur\'97one-forty.\'94\
\
      Val gave the Ford full rein; he still drove like a man in a new\
      country on bad roads, who refuses to compromise, and expects\
      heaven at every hole.\
\
      \'93That's a young woman who knows her way about,\'94 he said. \'93I say,\
      has it struck you?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Holly.\
\
      \'93Uncle Soames and your Dad\'97bit awkward, isn't it?\'94\
\
      \'93She won't know, and he won't know, and nothing must be said, of\
      course. It's only for five days, Val.\'94\
\
      \'93Stable secret! Righto!\'94 If Holly thought it safe, it was.\
      Glancing slyly round at him, she said: \'93Did you notice how\
      beautifully she asked herself?\'94\
\
      \'93No!\'94\
\
      \'93Well, she did. What do you think of her, Val?\'94\
\
      \'93Pretty and clever; but she might run out at any corner if she\
      got her monkey up, I should say.\'94\
\
      \'93I'm wondering,\'94 Holly murmured, \'93whether she is the modern young\
      woman. One feels at sea coming home into all this.\'94\
\
      \'93You? You get the hang of things so quick.\'94\
\
      Holly slid her hand into his coat-pocket.\
\
      \'93You keep one in the know,\'94 said Val encouraged. \'93What do you\
      think of that Belgian fellow, Profond?\'94\
\
      \'93I think he's rather 'a good devil.'\'94\
\
      Val grinned.\
\
      \'93He seems to me a queer fish for a friend of our family. In fact,\
      our family is in pretty queer waters, with Uncle Soames marrying\
      a Frenchwoman, and your Dad marrying Soames's first. Our\
      grandfathers would have had fits!\'94\
\
      \'93So would anybody's, my dear.\'94\
\
      \'93This car,\'94 Val said suddenly, \'93wants rousing; she doesn't get\
      her hind legs under her uphill. I shall have to give her her head\
      on the slope if I'm to catch that train.\'94\
\
      There was that about horses which had prevented him from ever\
      really sympathising with a car, and the running of the Ford under\
      his guidance compared with its running under that of Holly was\
      always noticeable. He caught the train.\
\
      \'93Take care going home; she'll throw you down if she can.\
      Good-bye, darling.\'94\
\
      \'93Good-bye,\'94 called Holly, and kissed her hand.\
\
      In the train, after quarter of an hour's indecision between\
      thoughts of Holly, his morning paper, the look of the bright day,\
      and his dim memory of Newmarket, Val plunged into the recesses of\
      a small square book, all names, pedigrees, tap-roots, and notes\
      about the make and shape of horses. The Forsyte in him was bent\
      on the acquisition of a certain strain of blood, and he was\
      subduing resolutely as yet the Dartie hankering for a Nutter. On\
      getting back to England, after the profitable sale of his South\
      African farm and stud, and observing that the sun seldom shone,\
      Val had said to himself: \'93I've absolutely got to have an interest\
      in life, or this country will give me the blues. Hunting's not\
      enough, I'll breed and I'll train.\'94 With just that extra pinch of\
      shrewdness and decision imparted by long residence in a new\
      country, Val had seen the weak point of modern breeding. They\
      were all hypnotised by fashion and high price. He should buy for\
      looks, and let names go hang! And here he was already, hypnotised\
      by the prestige of a certain strain of blood! Half-consciously,\
      he thought: 'There's something in this damned climate which makes\
      one go round in a ring. All the same, I must have a strain of\
      Mayfly blood.'\
\
      In this mood he reached the Mecca of his hopes. It was one of\
      those quiet meetings favourable to such as wish to look into\
      horses, rather than into the mouths of bookmakers; and Val clung\
      to the paddock. His twenty years of Colonial life, divesting him\
      of the dandyism in which he had been bred, had left him the\
      essential neatness of the horseman, and given him a queer and\
      rather blighting eye over what he called \'93the silly haw-haw\'94 of\
      some Englishmen, the \'93flapping cockatoory\'94 of some\
      English-women\'97Holly had none of that and Holly was his model.\
      Observant, quick, resourceful, Val went straight to the heart of\
      a transaction, a horse, a drink; and he was on his way to the\
      heart of a Mayfly filly, when a slow voice said at his elbow:\
\
      \'93Mr. Val Dartie? How's Mrs. Val Dartie? She's well, I hope.\'94 And\
      he saw beside him the Belgian he had met at his sister Imogen's.\
\
      \'93Prosper Profond\'97I met you at lunch,\'94 said the voice.\
\
      \'93How are you?\'94 murmured Val.\
\
      \'93I'm very well,\'94 replied Monsieur Profond, smiling with a certain\
      inimitable slowness. \'93A good devil,\'94 Holly had called him. Well!\
      He looked a little like a devil, with his dark, clipped, pointed\
      beard; a sleepy one though, and good-humoured, with fine eyes,\
      unexpectedly intelligent.\
\
      \'93Here's a gentleman wants to know you\'97cousin of yours\'97Mr. George\
      Forsyde.\'94\
\
      Val saw a large form, and a face clean-shaven, bull-like, a\
      little lowering, with sardonic humour bubbling behind a full grey\
      eye; he remembered it dimly from old days when he would dine with\
      his father at the Iseeum Club.\
\
      \'93I used to go racing with your father,\'94 George was saying: \'93How's\
      the stud? Like to buy one of my screws?\'94\
\
      Val grinned, to hide the sudden feeling that the bottom had\
      fallen out of breeding. They believed in nothing over here, not\
      even in horses. George Forsyte, Prosper Profond! The devil\
      himself was not more disillusioned than those two.\
\
      \'93Didn't know you were a racing man,\'94 he said to Monsieur Profond.\
\
      \'93I'm not. I don't care for it. I'm a yachtin' man. I don't care\
      for yachtin' either, but I like to see my friends. I've got some\
      lunch, Mr. Val Dartie, just a small lunch, if you'd like to 'ave\
      some; not much\'97just a small one\'97in my car.\'94\
\
      \'93Thanks,\'94 said Val; \'93very good of you. I'll come along in about\
      quarter of an hour.\'94\
\
      \'93Over there. Mr. Forsyde's comin',\'94 and Monsieur Profond\
      \'93poinded\'94 with a yellow-gloved finger; \'93small car, with a small\
      lunch\'94; he moved on, groomed, sleepy, and remote, George Forsyte\
      following, neat, huge, and with his jesting air.\
\
      Val remained gazing at the Mayfly filly. George Forsyte, of\
      course, was an old chap, but this Profond might be about his own\
      age; Val felt extremely young, as if the Mayfly filly were a toy\
      at which those two had laughed. The animal had lost reality.\
\
      \'93That 'small' mare\'94\'97he seemed to hear the voice of Monsieur\
      Profond\'97\'93what do you see in her?\'97we must all die!\'94\
\
      And George Forsyte, crony of his father, racing still! The Mayfly\
      strain\'97was it any better than any other? He might just as well\
      have a flutter with his money instead.\
\
      \'93No, by gum!\'94 he muttered suddenly, \'93if it's no good breeding\
      horses, it's no good doing anything. What did I come for? I'll\
      buy her.\'94\
\
      He stood back and watched the ebb of the paddock visitors toward\
      the stand. Natty old chips, shrewd portly fellows, Jews, trainers\
      looking as if they had never been guilty of seeing a horse in\
      their lives; tall, flapping, languid women, or brisk, loud-voiced\
      women; young men with an air as if trying to take it\
      seriously\'97two or three of them with only one arm.\
\
      'Life over here's a game!' thought Val. 'Muffin bell rings,\
      horses run, money changes hands; ring again, run again, money\
      changes back.'\
\
      But, alarmed at his own philosophy, he went to the paddock gate\
      to watch the Mayfly filly canter down. She moved well; and he\
      made his way over to the \'93small\'94 car. The \'93small\'94 lunch was the\
      sort a man dreams of but seldom gets; and when it was concluded\
      Monsieur Profond walked back with him to the paddock.\
\
      \'93Your wife's a nice woman,\'94 was his surprising remark.\
\
      \'93Nicest woman I know,\'94 returned Val dryly.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Monsieur Profond; \'93she has a nice face. I admire nice\
      women.\'94\
\
      Val looked at him suspiciously, but something kindly and direct\
      in the heavy diabolism of his companion disarmed him for the\
      moment.\
\
      \'93Any time you like to come on my yacht, I'll give her a small\
      cruise.\'94\
\
      \'93Thanks,\'94 said Val, in arms again, \'93she hates the sea.\'94\
\
      \'93So do I,\'94 said Monsieur Profond.\
\
      \'93Then why do you yacht?\'94\
\
      The Belgian's eyes smiled. \'93Oh! I don't know. I've done\
      everything; it's the last thing I'm doin'.\'94\
\
      \'93It must be d-d expensive. I should want more reason than that.\'94\
\
      Monsieur Prosper Profond raised his eyebrows, and puffed out a\
      heavy lower lip.\
\
      \'93I'm an easy-goin' man,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93Were you in the War?\'94 asked Val.\
\
      \'93Ye-es. I've done that too. I was gassed; it was a small bit\
      unpleasant.\'94 He smiled with a deep and sleepy air of prosperity,\
      as if he had caught it from his name.\
\
      Whether his saying \'93small\'94 when he ought to have said \'93little\'94\
      was genuine mistake or affectation Val could not decide; the\
      fellow was evidently capable of anything.\
\
      Among the ring of buyers round the Mayfly filly who had won her\
      race, Monsieur Profond said:\
\
      \'93You goin' to bid?\'94\
\
      Val nodded. With this sleepy Satan at his elbow, he felt in need\
      of faith. Though placed above the ultimate blows of Providence by\
      the forethought of a grand-father who had tied him up a thousand\
      a year to which was added the thousand a year tied up for Holly\
      by her grand-father, Val was not flush of capital that he could\
      touch, having spent most of what he had realised from his South\
      African farm on his establishment in Sussex. And very soon he was\
      thinking: 'Dash it! she's going beyond me!' His limit-six\
      hundred-was exceeded; he dropped out of the bidding. The Mayfly\
      filly passed under the hammer at seven hundred and fifty guineas.\
      He was turning away vexed when the slow voice of Monsieur Profond\
      said in his ear:\
\
      \'93Well, I've bought that small filly, but I don't want her; you\
      take her and give her to your wife.\'94\
\
      Val looked at the fellow with renewed suspicion, but the good\
      humour in his eyes was such that he really could not take\
      offence.\
\
      \'93I made a small lot of money in the War,\'94 began Monsieur Profond\
      in answer to that look. \'93I 'ad armament shares. I like to give it\
      away. I'm always makin' money. I want very small lot myself. I\
      like my friends to 'ave it.\'94\
\
      \'93I'll buy her of you at the price you gave,\'94 said Val with sudden\
      resolution.\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Monsieur Profond. \'93You take her. I don' want her.\'94\
\
      \'93Hang it! one doesn't\'97\'94\
\
      \'93Why not?\'94 smiled Monsieur Profond. \'93I'm a friend of your\
      family.\'94\
\
      \'93Seven hundred and fifty guineas is not a box of cigars,\'94 said\
      Val impatiently.\
\
      \'93All right; you keep her for me till I want her, and do what you\
      like with her.\'94\
\
      \'93So long as she's yours,\'94 said Val. \'93I don't mind that.\'94\
\
      \'93That's all right,\'94 murmured Monsieur Profond, and moved away.\
\
      Val watched; he might be \'93a good devil,\'94 but then again he might\
      not. He saw him rejoin George Forsyte, and thereafter saw him no\
      more.\
\
      He spent those nights after racing at his mother's house in Green\
      Street.\
\
      Winifred Dartie at sixty-two was marvellously preserved,\
      considering the three-and-thirty years during which she had put\
      up with Montague Dartie, till almost happily released by a French\
      staircase. It was to her a vehement satisfaction to have her\
      favourite son back from South Africa after all this time, to feel\
      him so little changed, and to have taken a fancy to his wife.\
      Winifred, who in the late seventies, before her marriage, had\
      been in the vanguard of freedom, pleasure, and fashion, confessed\
      her youth outclassed by the donzellas of the day. They seemed,\
      for instance, to regard marriage as an incident, and Winifred\
      sometimes regretted that she had not done the same; a second,\
      third, fourth incident might have secured her a partner of less\
      dazzling inebriety; though, after all, he had left her Val,\
      Imogen, Maud, Benedict (almost a colonel and unharmed by the\
      War)\'97none of whom had been divorced as yet. The steadiness of her\
      children often amazed one who remembered their father; but, as\
      she was fond of believing, they were really all Forsytes,\
      favouring herself, with the exception, perhaps, of Imogen. Her\
      brother's \'93little girl\'94 Fleur frankly puzzled Winifred. The child\
      was as restless as any of these modern young women\'97\'93She's a small\
      flame in a draught,\'94 Prosper Profond had said one day after\
      dinner\'97but she did not flap, or talk at the top of her voice. The\
      steady Forsyteism in Winifred's own character instinctively\
      resented the feeling in the air, the modern girl's habits and her\
      motto: \'93All's much of a muchness! Spend, to-morrow we shall be\
      poor!\'94 She found it a saving grace in Fleur that, having set her\
      heart on a thing, she had no change of heart until she got\
      it\'97though\'97what happened after, Fleur was, of course, too young to\
      have made evident. The child was a \'93very pretty little thing,\'94\
      too, and quite a credit to take about, with her mother's French\
      taste and gift for wearing clothes; everybody turned to look at\
      Fleur\'97great consideration to Winifred, a lover of the style and\
      distinction which had so cruelly deceived her in the case of\
      Montague Dartie.\
\
      In discussing her with Val, at breakfast on Saturday morning,\
      Winifred dwelt on the family skeleton.\
\
      \'93That little affair of your father-in-law and your Aunt Irene,\
      Val\'97it's old as the hills, of course, Fleur need know nothing\
      about it\'97making a fuss. Your Uncle Soames is very particular\
      about that. So you'll be careful.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes! But it's dashed awkward\'97Holly's young half-brother is\
      coming to live with us while he learns farming. He's there\
      already.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 said Winifred. \'93That is a gaff! What is he like?\'94\
\
      \'93Only saw him once\'97at Robin Hill, when we were home in 1909; he\
      was naked and painted blue and yellow in stripes\'97a jolly little\
      chap.\'94\
\
      Winifred thought that \'93rather nice,\'94 and added comfortably:\
      \'93Well, Holly's sensible; she'll know how to deal with it. I\
      shan't tell your uncle. It'll only bother him. It's a great\
      comfort to have you back, my dear boy, now that I'm getting on.\'94\
\
      \'93Getting on! Why! you're as young as ever. That chap Profond,\
      Mother, is he all right?\'94\
\
      \'93Prosper Profond! Oh! the most amusing man I know.\'94\
\
      Val grunted, and recounted the story of the Mayfly filly.\
\
      \'93That's so like him,\'94 murmured Winifred. \'93He does all sorts of\
      things.\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Val shrewdly, \'93our family haven't been too lucky\
      with that kind of cattle; they're too light-hearted for us.\'94\
\
      It was true, and Winifred's blue study lasted a full minute\
      before she answered:\
\
      \'93Oh! well! He's a foreigner, Val; one must make allowances.\'94\
\
      \'93All right, I'll use his filly and make it up to him, somehow.\'94\
\
      And soon after he gave her his blessing, received a kiss, and\
      left her for his bookmaker's, the Iseeum Club, and Victoria\
      station.\
\
\
\
\
      VI.\'97JON\
\
      Mrs. Val Dartie, after twenty years of South Africa, had fallen\
      deeply in love, fortunately with something of her own, for the\
      object of her passion was the prospect in front of her windows,\
      the cool clear light on the green Downs. It was England again, at\
      last! England more beautiful than she had dreamed. Chance had, in\
      fact, guided the Val Darties to a spot where the South Downs had\
      real charm when the sun shone. Holly had enough of her father's\
      eye to apprehend the rare quality of their outlines and chalky\
      radiance; to go up there by the ravine-like lane and wander along\
      toward Chanctonbury or Amberley, was still a delight which she\
      hardly attempted to share with Val, whose admiration of Nature\
      was confused by a Forsyte's instinct for getting something out of\
      it, such as the condition of the turf for his horses' exercise.\
\
      Driving the Ford home with a certain humouring, smoothness, she\
      promised herself that the first use she would make of Jon would\
      be to take him up there, and show him \'93the view\'94 under this\
      May-day sky.\
\
      She was looking forward to her young half-brother with a\
      motherliness not exhausted by Val. A three-day visit to Robin\
      Hill, soon after their arrival home, had yielded no sight of\
      him\'97he was still at school; so that her recollection, like Val's,\
      was of a little sunny-haired boy, striped blue and yellow, down\
      by the pond.\
\
      Those three days at Robin Hill had been exciting, sad,\
      embarrassing. Memories of her dead brother, memories of Val's\
      courtship; the ageing of her father, not seen for twenty years,\
      something funereal in his ironic gentleness which did not escape\
      one who had much subtle instinct; above all, the presence of her\
      stepmother, whom she could still vaguely remember as the \'93lady in\
      grey\'94 of days when she was little and grandfather alive and\
      Mademoiselle Beauce so cross because that intruder gave her music\
      lessons\'97all these confused and tantalised a spirit which had\
      longed to find Robin Hill untroubled. But Holly was adept at\
      keeping things to herself, and all had seemed to go quite well.\
\
      Her father had kissed her when she left him, with lips which she\
      was sure had trembled.\
\
      \'93Well, my dear,\'94 he said, \'93the War hasn't changed Robin Hill, has\
      it? If only you could have brought Jolly back with you! I say,\
      can you stand this spiritualistic racket? When the oak-tree dies,\
      it dies, I'm afraid.\'94\
\
      From the warmth of her embrace he probably divined that he had\
      let the cat out of the bag, for he rode off at once on irony.\
\
      \'93Spiritualism\'97queer word, when the more they manifest the more\
      they prove that they've got hold of matter.\'94\
\
      \'93How?\'94 said Holly.\
\
      \'93Why! Look at their photographs of auric presences. You must have\
      something material for light and shade to fall on before you can\
      take a photograph. No, it'll end in our calling all matter\
      spirit, or all spirit matter\'97I don't know which.\'94\
\
      \'93But don't you believe in survival, Dad?\'94\
\
      Jolyon had looked at her, and the sad whimsicality of his face\
      impressed her deeply.\
\
      \'93Well, my dear, I should like to get something out of death. I've\
      been looking into it a bit. But for the life of me I can't find\
      anything that telepathy, sub-consciousness, and emanation from\
      the storehouse of this world can't account for just as well. Wish\
      I could! Wishes father thought but they don't breed evidence.\'94\
      Holly had pressed her lips again to his forehead with the feeling\
      that it confirmed his theory that all matter was becoming\
      spirit\'97his brow felt, somehow, so insubstantial.\
\
      But the most poignant memory of that little visit had been\
      watching, unobserved, her stepmother reading to herself a letter\
      from Jon. It was\'97she decided\'97the prettiest sight she had ever\
      seen. Irene, lost as it were in the letter of her boy, stood at a\
      window where the light fell on her face and her fine grey hair;\
      her lips were moving, smiling, her dark eyes laughing, dancing,\
      and the hand which did not hold the letter was pressed against\
      her breast. Holly withdrew as from a vision of perfect love,\
      convinced that Jon must be nice.\
\
      When she saw him coming out of the station with a kit-bag in\
      either hand, she was confirmed in her predisposition. He was a\
      little like Jolly, that long-lost idol of her childhood, but\
      eager-looking and less formal, with deeper eyes and\
      brighter-coloured hair, for he wore no hat; altogether a very\
      interesting \'93little\'94 brother!\
\
      His tentative politeness charmed one who was accustomed to\
      assurance in the youthful manner; he was disturbed because she\
      was to drive him home, instead of his driving her. Shouldn't he\
      have a shot? They hadn't a car at Robin Hill since the War, of\
      course, and he had only driven once, and landed up a bank, so she\
      oughtn't to mind his trying. His laugh, soft and infectious, was\
      very attractive, though that word, she had heard, was now quite\
      old-fashioned. When they reached the house he pulled out a\
      crumpled letter which she read while he was washing\'97a quite short\
      letter, which must have cost her father many a pang to write.\
\
      \'93MY DEAR,\
\
      \'93You and Val will not forget, I trust, that Jon knows nothing of\
      family history. His mother and I think he is too young at\
      present. The boy is very dear, and the apple of her eye. Verbum\
      sapientibus,\
\
      \'93Your loving father,\
\
      \'93J. F.\'94\
\
      That was all; but it renewed in Holly an uneasy regret that Fleur\
      was coming.\
\
      After tea she fulfilled that promise to herself and took Jon up\
      the hill. They had a long talk, sitting above an old chalk-pit\
      grown over with brambles and goosepenny. Milkwort and liverwort\
      starred the green slope, the larks sang, and thrushes in the\
      brake, and now and then a gull flighting inland would wheel very\
      white against the paling sky, where the vague moon was coming up.\
      Delicious fragrance came to them, as if little invisible\
      creatures were running and treading scent out of the blades of\
      grass.\
\
      Jon, who had fallen silent, said rather suddenly:\
\
      \'93I say, this is wonderful! There's no fat on it at all. Gull's\
      flight and sheep-bells.\'94\
\
      \'93'Gull's flight and sheep-bells'. You're a poet, my dear!\'94\
\
      Jon sighed.\
\
      \'93Oh, Golly! No go!\'94\
\
      \'93Try! I used to at your age.\'94\
\
      \'93Did you? Mother says 'try' too; but I'm so rotten. Have you any\
      of yours for me to see?\'94\
\
      \'93My dear,\'94 Holly murmured, \'93I've been married nineteen years. I\
      only wrote verses when I wanted to be.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 said Jon, and turned over on his face: the one cheek she\
      could see was a charming colour. Was Jon \'93touched in the wind,\'94\
      then, as Val would have called it? Already? But, if so, all the\
      better, he would take no notice of young Fleur. Besides, on\
      Monday he would begin his farming. And she smiled. Was it Burns\
      who followed the plough, or only Piers Plowman? Nearly every\
      young man and most young women seemed to be poets now, judging\
      from the number of their books she had read out in South Africa,\
      importing them from Hatchus and Bumphards; and quite good\'97oh!\
      quite; much better than she had been herself! But then poetry had\
      only really come in since her day\'97with motor-cars. Another long\
      talk after dinner over a wood fire in the low hall, and there\
      seemed little left to know about Jon except anything of real\
      importance. Holly parted from him at his bedroom door, having\
      seen twice over that he had everything, with the conviction that\
      she would love him, and Val would like him. He was eager, but did\
      not gush; he was a splendid listener, sympathetic, reticent about\
      himself. He evidently loved their father, and adored his mother.\
      He liked riding, rowing, and fencing better than games. He saved\
      moths from candles, and couldn't bear spiders, but put them out\
      of doors in screws of paper sooner than kill them. In a word, he\
      was amiable. She went to sleep, thinking that he would suffer\
      horribly if anybody hurt him; but who would hurt him?\
\
      Jon, on the other hand, sat awake at his window with a bit of\
      paper and a pencil, writing his first \'93real poem\'94 by the light of\
      a candle because there was not enough moon to see by, only enough\
      to make the night seem fluttery and as if engraved on silver.\
      Just the night for Fleur to walk, and turn her eyes, and lead\
      on-over the hills and far away. And Jon, deeply furrowed in his\
      ingenuous brow, made marks on the paper and rubbed them out and\
      wrote them in again, and did all that was necessary for the\
      completion of a work of art; and he had a feeling such as the\
      winds of Spring must have, trying their first songs among the\
      coming blossom. Jon was one of those boys (not many) in whom a\
      home-trained love of beauty had survived school life. He had had\
      to keep it to himself, of course, so that not even the\
      drawing-master knew of it; but it was there, fastidious and clear\
      within him. And his poem seemed to him as lame and stilted as the\
      night was winged. But he kept it, all the same. It was a \'93beast,\'94\
      but better than nothing as an expression of the inexpressible.\
      And he thought with a sort of discomfiture: 'I shan't be able to\
      show it to Mother.' He slept terribly well, when he did sleep,\
      overwhelmed by novelty.\
\
\
\
\
      VII.\'97FLEUR\
\
      To avoid the awkwardness of questions which could not be\
      answered, all that had been told Jon was:\
\
      \'93There's a girl coming down with Val for the week-end.\'94\
\
      For the same reason, all that had been told Fleur was: \'93We've got\
      a youngster staying with us.\'94\
\
      The two yearlings, as Val called them in his thoughts, met\
      therefore in a manner which for unpreparedness left nothing to be\
      desired. They were thus introduced by Holly:\
\
      \'93This is Jon, my little brother; Fleur's a cousin of ours, Jon.\'94\
\
      Jon, who was coming in through a French window out of strong\
      sunlight, was so confounded by the providential nature of this\
      miracle, that he had time to hear Fleur say calmly: \'93Oh, how do\
      you do?\'94 as if he had never seen her, and to understand dimly\
      from the quickest imaginable little movement of her head that he\
      never had seen her. He bowed therefore over her hand in an\
      intoxicated manner, and became more silent than the grave. He\
      knew better than to speak. Once in his early life, surprised\
      reading by a nightlight, he had said fatuously \'93I was just\
      turning over the leaves, Mum,\'94 and his mother had replied: \'93Jon,\
      never tell stories, because of your face nobody will ever believe\
      them.\'94\
\
      The saying had permanently undermined the confidence necessary to\
      the success of spoken untruth. He listened therefore to Fleur's\
      swift and rapt allusions to the jolliness of everything, plied\
      her with scones and jam, and got away as soon as might be. They\
      say that in delirium tremens you see a fixed object, preferably\
      dark, which suddenly changes shape and position. Jon saw the\
      fixed object; it had dark eyes and passably dark hair, and\
      changed its position, but never its shape. The knowledge that\
      between him and that object there was already a secret\
      understanding (however impossible to understand) thrilled him so\
      that he waited feverishly, and began to copy out his poem\'97which\
      of course he would never dare to\'97show her\'97till the sound of\
      horses' hoofs roused him, and, leaning from his window, he saw\
      her riding forth with Val. It was clear that she wasted no time,\
      but the sight filled him with grief. He wasted his. If he had not\
      bolted, in his fearful ecstasy, he might have been asked to go\
      too. And from his window he sat and watched them disappear,\
      appear again in the chine of the road, vanish, and emerge once\
      more for a minute clear on the outline of the Down. 'Silly\
      brute!' he thought; 'I always miss my chances.'\
\
      Why couldn't he be self-confident and ready? And, leaning his\
      chin on his hands, he imagined the ride he might have had with\
      her. A week-end was but a week-end, and he had missed three hours\
      of it. Did he know any one except himself who would have been\
      such a flat? He did not.\
\
      He dressed for dinner early, and was first down. He would miss no\
      more. But he missed Fleur, who came down last. He sat opposite\
      her at dinner, and it was terrible\'97impossible to say anything for\
      fear of saying the wrong thing, impossible to keep his eyes fixed\
      on her in the only natural way; in sum, impossible to treat\
      normally one with whom in fancy he had already been over the\
      hills and far away; conscious, too, all the time, that he must\
      seem to her, to all of them, a dumb gawk. Yes, it was terrible!\
      And she was talking so well\'97swooping with swift wing this way and\
      that. Wonderful how she had learned an art which he found so\
      disgustingly difficult. She must think him hopeless indeed!\
\
      His sister's eyes, fixed on him with a certain astonishment,\
      obliged him at last to look at Fleur; but instantly her eyes,\
      very wide and eager, seeming to say, \'93Oh! for goodness' sake!\'94\
      obliged him to look at Val, where a grin obliged him to look at\
      his cutlet\'97that, at least, had no eyes, and no grin, and he ate\
      it hastily.\
\
      \'93Jon is going to be a farmer,\'94 he heard Holly say; \'93a farmer and\
      a poet.\'94\
\
      He glanced up reproachfully, caught the comic lift of her eyebrow\
      just like their father's, laughed, and felt better.\
\
      Val recounted the incident of Monsieur Prosper Profond; nothing\
      could have been more favourable, for, in relating it, he regarded\
      Holly, who in turn regarded him, while Fleur seemed to be\
      regarding with a slight frown some thought of her own, and Jon\
      was really free to look at her at last. She had on a white frock,\
      very simple and well made; her arms were bare, and her hair had a\
      white rose in it. In just that swift moment of free vision, after\
      such intense discomfort, Jon saw her sublimated, as one sees in\
      the dark a slender white fruit-tree; caught her like a verse of\
      poetry flashed before the eyes of the mind, or a tune which\
      floats out in the distance and dies. He wondered giddily how old\
      she was\'97she seemed so much more self-possessed and experienced\
      than himself. Why mustn't he say they had met? He remembered\
      suddenly his mother's face; puzzled, hurt-looking, when she\
      answered: \'93Yes, they're relations, but we don't know them.\'94\
      Impossible that his mother, who loved beauty, should not admire\
      Fleur if she did know her.\
\
      Alone with Val after dinner, he sipped port deferentially and\
      answered the advances of this new-found brother-in-law. As to\
      riding (always the first consideration with Val) he could have\
      the young chestnut, saddle and unsaddle it himself, and generally\
      look after it when he brought it in. Jon said he was accustomed\
      to all that at home, and saw that he had gone up one in his\
      host's estimation.\
\
      \'93Fleur,\'94 said Val, \'93can't ride much yet, but she's keen. Of\
      course, her father doesn't know a horse from a cart-wheel. Does\
      your Dad ride?\'94\
\
      \'93He used to; but now he's\'97you know, he's\'97\'94 He stopped, so hating\
      the word \'93old.\'94 His father was old, and yet not old; no\'97never!\
\
      \'93Quite,\'94 muttered Val. \'93I used to know your brother up at Oxford,\
      ages ago, the one who died in the Boer War. We had a fight in New\
      College Gardens. That was a queer business,\'94 he added, musing; \'93a\
      good deal came out of it.\'94\
\
      Jon's eyes opened wide; all was pushing him toward historical\
      research, when his sister's voice said gently from the doorway:\
\
      \'93Come along, you two,\'94 and he rose, his heart pushing him toward\
      something far more modern.\
\
      Fleur having declared that it was \'93simply too wonderful to stay\
      indoors,\'94 they all went out. Moonlight was frosting the dew, and\
      an old sundial threw a long shadow. Two box hedges at right\
      angles, dark and square, barred off the orchard. Fleur turned\
      through that angled opening.\
\
      \'93Come on!\'94 she called. Jon glanced at the others, and followed.\
      She was running among the trees like a ghost. All was lovely and\
      foamlike above her, and there was a scent of old trunks, and of\
      nettles. She vanished. He thought he had lost her, then almost\
      ran into her standing quite still.\
\
      \'93Isn't it jolly?\'94 she cried, and Jon answered:\
\
      \'93Rather!\'94\
\
      She reached up, twisted off a blossom and, twirling it in her\
      fingers, said:\
\
      \'93I suppose I can call you Jon?\'94\
\
      \'93I should think so just.\'94\
\
      \'93All right! But you know there's a feud between our families?\'94\
\
      Jon stammered: \'93Feud? Why?\'94\
\
      \'93It's ever so romantic and silly. That's why I pretended we\
      hadn't met. Shall we get up early to-morrow morning and go for a\
      walk before breakfast and have it out? I hate being slow about\
      things, don't you?\'94\
\
      Jon murmured a rapturous assent.\
\
      \'93Six o'clock, then. I think your mother's beautiful\'94\
\
      Jon said fervently: \'93Yes, she is.\'94\
\
      \'93I love all kinds of beauty,\'94 went on Fleur, \'93when it's exciting.\
      I don't like Greek things a bit.\'94\
\
      \'93What! Not Euripides?\'94\
\
      \'93Euripides? Oh! no, I can't bear Greek plays; they're so long. I\
      think beauty's always swift. I like to look at one picture, for\
      instance, and then run off. I can't bear a lot of things\
      together. Look!\'94 She held up her blossom in the moonlight.\
      \'93That's better than all the orchard, I think.\'94\
\
      And, suddenly, with her other hand she caught Jon's.\
\
      \'93Of all things in the world, don't you think caution's the most\
      awful? Smell the moonlight!\'94\
\
      She thrust the blossom against his face; Jon agreed giddily that\
      of all things in the world caution was the worst, and bending\
      over, kissed the hand which held his.\
\
      \'93That's nice and old-fashioned,\'94 said Fleur calmly. \'93You're\
      frightfully silent, Jon. Still I like silence when it's swift.\'94\
      She let go his hand. \'93Did you think I dropped my handkerchief on\
      purpose?\'94\
\
      \'93No!\'94 cried Jon, intensely shocked.\
\
      \'93Well, I did, of course. Let's get back, or they'll think we're\
      doing this on purpose too.\'94 And again she ran like a ghost among\
      the trees. Jon followed, with love in his heart, Spring in his\
      heart, and over all the moonlit white unearthly blossom. They\
      came out where they had gone in, Fleur walking demurely.\
\
      \'93It's quite wonderful in there,\'94 she said dreamily to Holly.\
\
      Jon preserved silence, hoping against hope that she might be\
      thinking it swift.\
\
      She bade him a casual and demure good-night, which made him think\
      he had been dreaming....\
\
      In her bedroom Fleur had flung off her gown, and, wrapped in a\
      shapeless garment, with the white flower still in her hair, she\
      looked like a mousme, sitting cross-legged on her bed, writing by\
      candlelight.\
\
      \'93DEAREST CHERRY,\
\
      \'93I believe I'm in love. I've got it in the neck, only the feeling\
      is really lower down. He's a second cousin-such a child, about\
      six months older and ten years younger than I am. Boys always\
      fall in love with their seniors, and girls with their juniors or\
      with old men of forty. Don't laugh, but his eyes are the truest\
      things I ever saw; and he's quite divinely silent! We had a most\
      romantic first meeting in London under the Vospovitch Juno. And\
      now he's sleeping in the next room and the moonlight's on the\
      blossom; and to-morrow morning, before anybody's awake, we're\
      going to walk off into Down fairyland. There's a feud between our\
      families, which makes it really exciting. Yes! and I may have to\
      use subterfuge and come on you for invitations\'97if so, you'll know\
      why! My father doesn't want us to know each other, but I can't\
      help that. Life's too short. He's got the most beautiful mother,\
      with lovely silvery hair and a young face with dark eyes. I'm\
      staying with his sister\'97who married my cousin; it's all mixed up,\
      but I mean to pump her to-morrow. We've often talked about love\
      being a spoil-sport; well, that's all tosh, it's the beginning of\
      sport, and the sooner you feel it, my dear, the better for you.\
\
      \'93Jon (not simplified spelling, but short for Jolyon, which is a\
      name in my family, they say) is the sort that lights up and goes\
      out; about five feet ten, still growing, and I believe he's going\
      to be a poet. If you laugh at me I've done with you forever. I\
      perceive all sorts of difficulties, but you know when I really\
      want a thing I get it. One of the chief effects of love is that\
      you see the air sort of inhabited, like seeing a face in the\
      moon; and you feel\'97you feel dancey and soft at the same time,\
      with a funny sensation\'97like a continual first sniff of\
      orange\'97blossom\'97Just above your stays. This is my first, and I\
      feel as if it were going to be my last, which is absurd, of\
      course, by all the laws of Nature and morality. If you mock me I\
      will smite you, and if you tell anybody I will never forgive you.\
      So much so, that I almost don't think I'll send this letter.\
      Anyway, I'll sleep over it. So good-night, my Cherry\'97oh!\
\
      \'93Your,\
\
      \'93FLEUR.\'94\
\
\
\
      VIII.\'97IDYLL ON GRASS\
\
      When those two young Forsytes emerged from the chine lane, and\
      set their faces east toward the sun, there was not a cloud in\
      heaven, and the Downs were dewy. They had come at a good bat up\
      the slope and were a little out of breath; if they had anything\
      to say they did not say it, but marched in the early awkwardness\
      of unbreakfasted morning under the songs of the larks. The\
      stealing out had been fun, but with the freedom of the tops the\
      sense of conspiracy ceased, and gave place to dumbness.\
\
      \'93We've made one blooming error,\'94 said Fleur, when they had gone\
      half a mile. \'93I'm hungry.\'94\
\
      Jon produced a stick of chocolate. They shared it and their\
      tongues were loosened. They discussed the nature of their homes\
      and previous existences, which had a kind of fascinating\
      unreality up on that lonely height. There remained but one thing\
      solid in Jon's past\'97his mother; but one thing solid in\
      Fleur's\'97her father; and of these figures, as though seen in the\
      distance with disapproving faces, they spoke little.\
\
      The Down dipped and rose again toward Chanctonbury Ring; a\
      sparkle of far sea came into view, a sparrow-hawk hovered in the\
      sun's eye so that the blood-nourished brown of his wings gleamed\
      nearly red. Jon had a passion for birds, and an aptitude for\
      sitting very still to watch them; keen-sighted, and with a memory\
      for what interested him, on birds he was almost worth listening\
      to. But in Chanctonbury Ring there were none\'97its great beech\
      temple was empty of life, and almost chilly at this early hour;\
      they came out willingly again into the sun on the far side. It\
      was Fleur's turn now. She spoke of dogs, and the way people\
      treated them. It was wicked to keep them on chains! She would\
      like to flog people who did that. Jon was astonished to find her\
      so humanitarian. She knew a dog, it seemed, which some farmer\
      near her home kept chained up at the end of his chicken run, in\
      all weathers, till it had almost lost its voice from barking!\
\
      \'93And the misery is,\'94 she said vehemently, \'93that if the poor thing\
      didn't bark at every one who passes it wouldn't be kept there. I\
      do think men are cunning brutes. I've let it go twice, on the\
      sly; it's nearly bitten me both times, and then it goes simply\
      mad with joy; but it always runs back home at last, and they\
      chain it up again. If I had my way, I'd chain that man up.\'94 Jon\
      saw her teeth and her eyes gleam. \'93I'd brand him on his forehead\
      with the word 'Brute'. that would teach him!\'94\
\
      Jon agreed that it would be a good remedy.\
\
      \'93It's their sense of property,\'94 he said, \'93which makes people\
      chain things. The last generation thought of nothing but\
      property; and that's why there was the War.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 said Fleur, \'93I never thought of that. Your people and mine\
      quarrelled about property. And anyway we've all got it\'97at least,\
      I suppose your people have.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! yes, luckily; I don't suppose I shall be any good at making\
      money.\'94\
\
      \'93If you were, I don't believe I should like you.\'94\
\
      Jon slipped his hand tremulously under her arm. Fleur looked\
      straight before her and chanted:\
\
      \'93Jon, Jon, the farmer's son, Stole a pig, and away he run!\'94\
\
      Jon's arm crept round her waist.\
\
      \'93This is rather sudden,\'94 said Fleur calmly; \'93do you often do it?\'94\
\
      Jon dropped his arm. But when she laughed his arm stole back\
      again; and Fleur began to sing:\
\
      \'93O who will oer the downs so free, O who will with me ride? O who\
      will up and follow me\'97-\'94\
\
      \'93Sing, Jon!\'94\
\
      Jon sang. The larks joined in, sheep-bells, and an early morning\
      church far away over in Steyning. They went on from tune to tune,\
      till Fleur said:\
\
      \'93My God! I am hungry now!\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! I am sorry!\'94\
\
      She looked round into his face.\
\
      \'93Jon, you're rather a darling.\'94\
\
      And she pressed his hand against her waist. Jon almost reeled\
      from happiness. A yellow-and-white dog coursing a hare startled\
      them apart. They watched the two vanish down the slope, till\
      Fleur said with a sigh: \'93He'll never catch it, thank goodness!\
      What's the time? Mine's stopped. I never wound it.\'94\
\
      Jon looked at his watch. \'93By Jove!\'94 he said, \'93mine's stopped;\
      too.\'94\
\
      They walked on again, but only hand in hand.\
\
      \'93If the grass is dry,\'94 said Fleur, \'93let's sit down for half a\
      minute.\'94\
\
      Jon took off his coat, and they shared it.\
\
      \'93Smell! Actually wild thyme!\'94\
\
      With his arm round her waist again, they sat some minutes in\
      silence.\
\
      \'93We are goats!\'94 cried Fleur, jumping up; \'93we shall be most\
      fearfully late, and look so silly, and put them on their guard.\
      Look here, Jon We only came out to get an appetite for breakfast,\
      and lost our way. See?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Jon.\
\
      \'93It's serious; there'll be a stopper put on us. Are you a good\
      liar?\'94\
\
      \'93I believe not very; but I can try.\'94\
\
      Fleur frowned.\
\
      \'93You know,\'94 she said, \'93I realize that they don't mean us to be\
      friends.\'94\
\
      \'93Why not?\'94\
\
      \'93I told you why.\'94\
\
      \'93But that's silly.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes; but you don't know my father!\'94\
\
      \'93I suppose he's fearfully fond of you.\'94\
\
      \'93You see, I'm an only child. And so are you\'97of your mother. Isn't\
      it a bore? There's so much expected of one. By the time they've\
      done expecting, one's as good as dead.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 muttered Jon, \'93life's beastly short. One wants to live\
      forever, and know everything.\'94\
\
      \'93And love everybody?\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 cried Jon; \'93I only want to love once\'97you.\'94\
\
      \'93Indeed! You're coming on! Oh! Look! There's the chalk-pit; we\
      can't be very far now. Let's run.\'94\
\
      Jon followed, wondering fearfully if he had offended her.\
\
      The chalk-pit was full of sunshine and the murmuration of bees.\
      Fleur flung back her hair.\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 she said, \'93in case of accidents, you may give me one\
      kiss, Jon,\'94 and she pushed her cheek forward. With ecstasy he\
      kissed that hot soft cheek.\
\
      \'93Now, remember! We lost our way; and leave it to me as much as\
      you can. I'm going to be rather beastly to you; it's safer; try\
      and be beastly to me!\'94\
\
      Jon shook his head. \'93That's impossible.\'94\
\
      \'93Just to please me; till five o'clock, at all events.\'94\
\
      \'93Anybody will be able to see through it,\'94 said Jon gloomily.\
\
      \'93Well, do your best. Look! There they are! Wave your hat! Oh! you\
      haven't got one. Well, I'll cooee! Get a little away from me, and\
      look sulky.\'94\
\
      Five minutes later, entering the house and doing his utmost to\
      look sulky, Jon heard her clear voice in the dining-room:\
\
      \'93Oh! I'm simply ravenous! He's going to be a farmer\'97and he loses\
      his way! The boy's an idiot!\'94\
\
\
\
\
      IX. GOYA\
\
      Lunch was over and Soames mounted to the picture-gallery in his\
      house near Mapleduram. He had what Annette called \'93a grief.\'94\
      Fleur was not yet home. She had been expected on Wednesday; had\
      wired that it would be Friday; and again on Friday that it would\
      be Sunday afternoon; and here were her aunt, and her cousins the\
      Cardigans, and this fellow Profond, and everything flat as a\
      pancake for the want of her. He stood before his Gauguin\'97sorest\
      point of his collection. He had bought the ugly great thing with\
      two early Matisses before the War, because there was such a fuss\
      about those Post-Impressionist chaps. He was wondering whether\
      Profond would take them off his hands\'97the fellow seemed not to\
      know what to do with his money\'97when he heard his sister's voice\
      say: \'93I think that's a horrid thing, Soames,\'94 and saw that\
      Winifred had followed him up.\
\
      \'93Oh! you do?\'94 he said dryly; \'93I gave five hundred for it.\'94\
\
      \'93Fancy! Women aren't made like that even if they are black.\'94\
\
      Soames uttered a glum laugh. \'93You didn't come up to tell me\
      that.\'94\
\
      \'93No. Do you know that Jolyon's boy is staying with Val and his\
      wife?\'94\
\
      Soames spun round.\
\
      \'93What?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 drawled Winifred; \'93he's gone to live with them there while\
      he learns farming.\'94\
\
      Soames had turned away, but her voice pursued him as he walked up\
      and down. \'93I warned Val that neither of them was to be spoken to\
      about old matters.\'94\
\
      \'93Why didn't you tell me before?\'94\
\
      Winifred shrugged her substantial shoulders.\
\
      \'93Fleur does what she likes. You've always spoiled her. Besides,\
      my dear boy, what's the harm?\'94\
\
      \'93The harm!\'94 muttered Soames. \'93Why, she\'97\'94 he checked himself. The\
      Juno, the handkerchief, Fleur's eyes, her questions, and now this\
      delay in her return\'97the symptoms seemed to him so sinister that,\
      faithful to his nature, he could not part with them.\
\
      \'93I think you take too much care,\'94 said Winifred. \'93If I were you,\
      I should tell her of that old matter. It's no good thinking that\
      girls in these days are as they used to be. Where they pick up\
      their knowledge I can't tell, but they seem to know everything.\'94\
\
      Over Soames' face, closely composed, passed a sort of spasm, and\
      Winifred added hastily:\
\
      \'93If you don't like to speak of it, I could for you.\'94\
\
      Soames shook his head. Unless there was absolute necessity the\
      thought that his adored daughter should learn of that old scandal\
      hurt his pride too much.\
\
      \'93No,\'94 he said, \'93not yet. Never if I can help it.\
\
      \'93Nonsense, my dear. Think what people are!\'94\
\
      \'93Twenty years is a long time,\'94 muttered Soames. \'93Outside our\
      family, who's likely to remember?\'94\
\
      Winifred was silenced. She inclined more and more to that peace\
      and quietness of which Montague Dartie had deprived her in her\
      youth. And, since pictures always depressed her, she soon went\
      down again.\
\
      Soames passed into the corner where, side by side, hung his real\
      Goya and the copy of the fresco \'93La Vendimia.\'94 His acquisition of\
      the real Goya rather beautifully illustrated the cobweb of vested\
      interests and passions which mesh the bright-winged fly of human\
      life. The real Goya's noble owner's ancestor had come into\
      possession of it during some Spanish war\'97it was in a word loot.\
      The noble owner had remained in ignorance of its value until in\
      the nineties an enterprising critic discovered that a Spanish\
      painter named Goya was a genius. It was only a fair Goya, but\
      almost unique in England, and the noble owner became a marked\
      man. Having many possessions and that aristocratic culture which,\
      independent of mere sensuous enjoyment, is founded on the sounder\
      principle that one must know everything and be fearfully\
      interested in life, he had fully intended to keep an article\
      which contributed to his reputation while he was alive, and to\
      leave it to the nation after he was dead. Fortunately for Soames,\
      the House of Lords was violently attacked in 1909, and the noble\
      owner became alarmed and angry. 'If,' he said to himself, 'they\
      think they can have it both ways they are very much mistaken. So\
      long as they leave me in quiet enjoyment the nation can have some\
      of my pictures at my death. But if the nation is going to bait\
      me, and rob me like this, I'm damned if I won't sell the lot.\
      They can't have my private property and my public spirit-both.'\
      He brooded in this fashion for several months till one morning,\
      after reading the speech of a certain statesman, he telegraphed\
      to his agent to come down and bring Bodkin. On going over the\
      collection Bodkin, than whose opinion on market values none was\
      more sought, pronounced that with a free hand to sell to America,\
      Germany, and other places where there was an interest in art, a\
      lot more money could be made than by selling in England. The\
      noble owner's public spirit\'97he said\'97was well known but the\
      pictures were unique. The noble owner put this opinion in his\
      pipe and smoked it for a year. At the end of that time he read\
      another speech by the same statesman, and telegraphed to his\
      agents: \'93Give Bodkin a free hand.\'94 It was at this juncture that\
      Bodkin conceived the idea which saved the Goya and two other\
      unique pictures for the native country of the noble owner. With\
      one hand Bodkin proffered the pictures to the foreign market,\
      with the other he formed a list of private British collectors.\
      Having obtained what he considered the highest possible bids from\
      across the seas, he submitted pictures and bids to the private\
      British collectors, and invited them, of their public spirit, to\
      outbid. In three instances (including the Goya) out of twenty-one\
      he was successful. And why? One of the private collectors made\
      buttons\'97he had made so many that he desired that his wife should\
      be called Lady \'93Buttons.\'94 He therefore bought a unique picture at\
      great cost, and gave it to the nation. It was \'93part,\'94 his friends\
      said, \'93of his general game.\'94 The second of the private collectors\
      was an Americophobe, and bought an unique picture to \'93spite the\
      damned Yanks.\'94 The third of the private collectors was Soames,\
      who\'97more sober than either of the, others\'97bought after a visit to\
      Madrid, because he was certain that Goya was still on the up\
      grade. Goya was not booming at the moment, but he would come\
      again; and, looking at that portrait, Hogarthian, Manetesque in\
      its directness, but with its own queer sharp beauty of paint, he\
      was perfectly satisfied still that he had made no error, heavy\
      though the price had been\'97heaviest he had ever paid. And next to\
      it was hanging the copy of \'93La Vendimia.\'94 There she was\'97the\
      little wretch\'97looking back at him in her dreamy mood, the mood he\
      loved best because he felt so much safer when she looked like\
      that.\
\
      He was still gazing when the scent of a cigar impinged on his\
      nostrils, and a voice said:\
\
      \'93Well, Mr. Forsyde, what you goin' to do with this small lot?\'94\
\
      That Belgian chap, whose mother\'97as if Flemish blood were not\
      enough\'97had been Armenian! Subduing a natural irritation, he said:\
\
      \'93Are you a judge of pictures?\'94\
\
      \'93Well, I've got a few myself.\'94\
\
      \'93Any Post-Impressionists?\'94\
\
      \'93Ye-es, I rather like them.\'94\
\
      \'93What do you think of this?\'94 said Soames, pointing to the\
      Gauguin.\
\
      Monsieur Profond protruded his lower lip and short pointed beard.\
\
      \'93Rather fine, I think,\'94 he said; \'93do you want to sell it?\'94\
\
      Soames checked his instinctive \'93Not particularly\'94\'97he would not\
      chaffer with this alien.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93What do you want for it?\'94\
\
      \'93What I gave.\'94\
\
      \'93All right,\'94 said Monsieur Profond. \'93I'll be glad to take that\
      small picture. Post-Impressionists\'97they're awful dead, but\
      they're amusin'. I don' care for pictures much, but I've got\
      some, just a small lot.\'94\
\
      \'93What do you care for?\'94\
\
      Monsieur Profond shrugged his shoulders.\
\
      \'93Life's awful like a lot of monkeys scramblin' for empty nuts.\'94\
\
      \'93You're young,\'94 said Soames. If the fellow must make a\
      generalization, he needn't suggest that the forms of property\
      lacked solidity!\
\
      \'93I don' worry,\'94 replied Monsieur Profond smiling; \'93we're born,\
      and we die. Half the world's starvin'. I feed a small lot of\
      babies out in my mother's country; but what's the use? Might as\
      well throw my money in the river.\'94\
\
      Soames looked at him, and turned back toward his Goya. He didn't\
      know what the fellow wanted.\
\
      \'93What shall I make my cheque for?\'94 pursued Monsieur Profond.\
\
      \'93Five hundred,\'94 said Soames shortly; \'93but I don't want you to\
      take it if you don't care for it more than that.\'94\
\
      \'93That's all right,\'94 said Monsieur Profond; \'93I'll be 'appy to 'ave\
      that picture.\'94\
\
      He wrote a cheque with a fountain-pen heavily chased with gold.\
      Soames watched the process uneasily. How on earth had the fellow\
      known that he wanted to sell that picture? Monsieur Profond held\
      out the cheque.\
\
      \'93The English are awful funny about pictures,\'94 he said. \'93So are\
      the French, so are my people. They're all awful funny.\'94\
\
      \'93I don't understand you,\'94 said Soames stiffly.\
\
      \'93It's like hats,\'94 said Monsieur Profond enigmatically, \'93small or\
      large, turnin' up or down\'97just the fashion. Awful funny.\'94 And,\
      smiling, he drifted out of the gallery again, blue and solid like\
      the smoke of his excellent cigar.\
\
      Soames had taken the cheque, feeling as if the intrinsic value of\
      ownership had been called in question. 'He's a cosmopolitan,' he\
      thought, watching Profond emerge from under the verandah with\
      Annette, and saunter down the lawn toward the river. What his\
      wife saw in the fellow he didn't know, unless it was that he\
      could speak her language; and there passed in Soames what\
      Monsieur Profond would have called a \'93small doubt\'94 whether\
      Annette was not too handsome to be walking with any one so\
      \'93cosmopolitan.\'94 Even at that distance he could see the blue fumes\
      from Profond's cigar wreath out in the quiet sunlight; and his\
      grey buckskin shoes, and his grey hat\'97the fellow was a dandy! And\
      he could see the quick turn of his wife's head, so very straight\
      on her desirable neck and shoulders. That turn of her neck always\
      seemed to him a little too showy, and in the \'93Queen of all I\
      survey\'94 manner\'97not quite distinguished. He watched them walk\
      along the path at the bottom of the garden. A young man in\
      flannels joined them down there\'97a Sunday caller no doubt, from up\
      the river. He went back to his Goya. He was still staring at that\
      replica of Fleur, and worrying over Winifred's news, when his\
      wife's voice said:\
\
      \'93Mr. Michael Mont, Soames. You invited him to see your pictures.\'94\
\
      There was the cheerful young man of the Gallery off Cork Street!\
\
      \'93Turned up, you see, sir; I live only four miles from Pangbourne.\
      Jolly day, isn't it?\'94\
\
      Confronted with the results of his expansiveness, Soames\
      scrutinized his visitor. The young man's mouth was excessively\
      large and curly\'97he seemed always grinning. Why didn't he grow the\
      rest of those idiotic little moustaches, which made him look like\
      a music-hall buffoon? What on earth were young men about,\
      deliberately lowering their class with these tooth-brushes, or\
      little slug whiskers? Ugh! Affected young idiots! In other\
      respects he was presentable, and his flannels very clean.\
\
      \'93Happy to see you!\'94 he said.\
\
      The young man, who had been turning his head from side to side,\
      became transfixed. \'93I say!\'94 he said, \'93'some' picture!\'94\
\
      Soames saw, with mixed sensations, that he had addressed the\
      remark to the Goya copy.\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 he said dryly, \'93that's not a Goya. It's a copy. I had it\
      painted because it reminded me of my daughter.\'94\
\
      \'93By Jove! I thought I knew the face, sir. Is she here?\'94\
\
      The frankness of his interest almost disarmed Soames.\
\
      \'93She'll be in after tea,\'94 he said. \'93Shall we go round the\
      pictures?\'94\
\
      And Soames began that round which never tired him. He had not\
      anticipated much intelligence from one who had mistaken a copy\
      for an original, but as they passed from section to section,\
      period to period, he was startled by the young man's frank and\
      relevant remarks. Natively shrewd himself, and even sensuous\
      beneath his mask, Soames had not spent thirty-eight years over\
      his one hobby without knowing something more about pictures than\
      their market values. He was, as it were, the missing link between\
      the artist and the commercial public. Art for art's sake and all\
      that, of course, was cant. But aesthetics and good taste were\
      necessary. The appreciation of enough persons of good taste was\
      what gave a work of art its permanent market value, or in other\
      words made it \'93a work of art.\'94 There was no real cleavage. And he\
      was sufficiently accustomed to sheep-like and unseeing visitors,\
      to be intrigued by one who did not hesitate to say of Mauve:\
      \'93Good old haystacks!\'94 or of James Maris: \'93Didn't he just paint\
      and paper 'em! Mathew was the real swell, sir; you could dig into\
      his surfaces!\'94 It was after the young man had whistled before a\
      Whistler, with the words, \'93D'you think he ever really saw a naked\
      woman, sir?\'94 that Soames remarked:\
\
      \'93What are you, Mr. Mont, if I may ask?\'94\
\
      \'93I, sir? I was going to be a painter, but the War knocked that.\
      Then in the trenches, you know, I used to dream of the Stock\
      Exchange, snug and warm and just noisy enough. But the Peace\
      knocked that, shares seem off, don't they? I've only been\
      demobbed about a year. What do you recommend, sir?\'94\
\
      \'93Have you got money?\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 answered the young man, \'93I've got a father; I kept him\
      alive during the War, so he's bound to keep me alive now. Though,\
      of course, there's the question whether he ought to be allowed to\
      hang on to his property. What do you think about that, sir?\'94\
\
      Soames, pale and defensive, smiled.\
\
      \'93The old man has fits when I tell him he may have to work yet.\
      He's got land, you know; it's a fatal disease.\'94\
\
      \'93This is my real Goya,\'94 said Soames dryly.\
\
      \'93By George! He was a swell. I saw a Goya in Munich once that\
      bowled me middle stump. A most evil-looking old woman in the most\
      gorgeous lace. He made no compromise with the public taste. That\
      old boy was 'some' explosive; he must have smashed up a lot of\
      convention in his day. Couldn't he just paint! He makes Velasquez\
      stiff, don't you think?\'94\
\
      \'93I have no Velasquez,\'94 said Soames.\
\
      The young man stared. \'93No,\'94 he said; \'93only nations or profiteers\
      can afford him, I suppose. I say, why shouldn't all the bankrupt\
      nations sell their Velasquez and Titians and other swells to the\
      profiteers by force, and then pass a law that any one who holds a\
      picture by an Old Master\'97see schedule\'97must hang it in a public\
      gallery? There seems something in that.\'94\
\
      \'93Shall we go down to tea?\'94 said Soames.\
\
      The young man's ears seemed to droop on his skull. 'He's not\
      dense,' thought Soames, following him off the premises.\
\
      Goya, with his satiric and surpassing precision, his original\
      \'93line,\'94 and the daring of his light and shade, could have\
      reproduced to admiration the group assembled round Annette's\
      tea-tray in the inglenook below. He alone, perhaps, of painters\
      would have done justice to the sunlight filtering through a\
      screen of creeper, to the lovely pallor of brass, the old cut\
      glasses, the thin slices of lemon in pale amber tea; justice to\
      Annette in her black lacey dress; there was something of the fair\
      Spaniard in her beauty, though it lacked the spirituality of that\
      rare type; to Winifred's grey-haired, corseted solidity; to\
      Soames, of a certain grey and flat-cheeked distinction; to the\
      vivacious Michael Mont, pointed in ear and eye; to Imogen, dark,\
      luscious of glance, growing a little stout; to Prosper Profond,\
      with his expression as who should say, \'93Well, Mr. Goya, what's\
      the use of paintin' this small party?\'94 finally, to Jack Cardigan,\
      with his shining stare and tanned sanguinity betraying the moving\
      principle: \'93I'm English, and I live to be fit.\'94\
\
      Curious, by the way, that Imogen, who as a girl had declared\
      solemnly one day at Timothy's that she would never marry a good\
      man\'97they were so dull\'97should have married Jack Cardigan, in whom\
      health had so destroyed all traces of original sin, that she\
      might have retired to rest with ten thousand other Englishmen\
      without knowing the difference from the one she had chosen to\
      repose beside. \'93Oh!\'94 she would say of him, in her \'93amusing\'94 way,\
      \'93Jack keeps himself so fearfully fit; he's never had a day's\
      illness in his life. He went right through the War without a\
      finger-ache. You really can't imagine how fit he is!\'94 Indeed, he\
      was so \'93fit\'94 that he couldn't see when she was flirting, which\
      was such a comfort in a way. All the same she was quite fond of\
      him, so far as one could be of a sports-machine, and of the two\
      little Cardigans made after his pattern. Her eyes just then were\
      comparing him maliciously with Prosper Profond. There was no\
      \'93small\'94 sport or game which Monsieur Profond had not played at\
      too, it seemed, from skittles to tarpon-fishing, and worn out\
      every one. Imogen would sometimes wish that they had worn out\
      Jack, who continued to play at them and talk of them with the\
      simple zeal of a school-girl learning hockey; at the age of\
      Great-uncle Timothy she well knew that Jack would be playing\
      carpet golf in her bedroom, and \'93wiping somebody's eye.\'94\
\
      He was telling them now how he had \'93pipped the pro\'97a charmin'\
      fellow, playin' a very good game,\'94 at the last hole this morning;\
      and how he had pulled down to Caversham since lunch, and trying\
      to incite Prosper Profond to play him a set of tennis after\
      tea\'97do him good\'97\'93keep him fit.\
\
      \'93But what's the use of keepin' fit?\'94 said Monsieur Profond.\
\
      \'93Yes, sir,\'94 murmured Michael Mont, \'93what do you keep fit for?\'94\
\
      \'93Jack,\'94 cried Imogen, enchanted, \'93what do you keep fit for?\'94\
\
      Jack Cardigan stared with all his health. The questions were like\
      the buzz of a mosquito, and he put up his hand to wipe them away.\
      During the War, of course, he had kept fit to kill Germans; now\
      that it was over he either did not know, or shrank in delicacy\
      from explanation of his moving principle.\
\
      \'93But he's right,\'94 said Monsieur Profond unexpectedly, \'93there's\
      nothin' left but keepin' fit.\'94\
\
      The saying, too deep for Sunday afternoon, would have passed\
      unanswered, but for the mercurial nature of young Mont.\
\
      \'93Good!\'94 he cried. \'93That's the great discovery of the War. We all\
      thought we were progressing\'97now we know we're only changing.\'94\
\
      \'93For the worse,\'94 said Monsieur Profond genially.\
\
      \'93How you are cheerful, Prosper!\'94 murmured Annette.\
\
      \'93You come and play tennis!\'94 said Jack Cardigan; \'93you've got the\
      hump. We'll soon take that down. D'you play, Mr. Mont?\'94\
\
      \'93I hit the ball about, sir.\'94\
\
      At this juncture Soames rose, ruffled in that deep instinct of\
      preparation for the future which guided his existence.\
\
      \'93When Fleur comes\'97\'94 he heard Jack Cardigan say.\
\
      Ah! and why didn't she come? He passed through drawing-room,\
      hall, and porch out on to the drive, and stood there listening\
      for the car. All was still and Sundayfied; the lilacs in full\
      flower scented the air. There were white clouds, like the\
      feathers of ducks gilded by the sunlight. Memory of the day when\
      Fleur was born, and he had waited in such agony with her life and\
      her mother's balanced in his hands, came to him sharply. He had\
      saved her then, to be the flower of his life. And now! was she\
      going to give him trouble\'97pain\'97give him trouble? He did not like\
      the look of things! A blackbird broke in on his reverie with an\
      evening song\'97a great big fellow up in that acacia-tree. Soames\
      had taken quite an interest in his birds of late years; he and\
      Fleur would walk round and watch them; her eyes were sharp as\
      needles, and she knew every nest. He saw her dog, a retriever,\
      lying on the drive in a patch of sunlight, and called to him.\
      \'93Hallo, old fellow-waiting for her too!\'94 The dog came slowly with\
      a grudging tail, and Soames mechanically laid a pat on his head.\
      The dog, the bird, the lilac, all were part of Fleur for him; no\
      more, no less. 'Too fond of her!' he thought, 'too fond!' He was\
      like a man uninsured, with his ships at sea. Uninsured again\'97as\
      in that other time, so long ago, when he would wander dumb and\
      jealous in the wilderness of London, longing for that woman\'97his\
      first wife\'97the mother of this infernal boy. Ah! There was the car\
      at last! It drew up, it had luggage, but no Fleur.\
\
      \'93Miss Fleur is walking up, sir, by the towing-path.\'94\
\
      Walking all those miles? Soames stared. The man's face had the\
      beginning of a smile on it. What was he grinning at? And very\
      quickly he turned, saying, \'93All right, Sims!\'94 and went into the\
      house. He mounted to the picture-gallery once more. He had from\
      there a view of the river bank, and stood with his eyes fixed on\
      it, oblivious of the fact that it would be an hour at least\
      before her figure showed there. Walking up! And that fellow's\
      grin! The boy\'97! He turned abruptly from the window. He couldn't\
      spy on her. If she wanted to keep things from him\'97she must; he\
      could not spy on her. His heart felt empty, and bitterness\
      mounted from it into his very mouth. The staccato shouts of Jack\
      Cardigan pursuing the ball, the laugh of young Mont rose in the\
      stillness and came in. He hoped they were making that chap\
      Profond run. And the girl in \'93La Vendimia\'94 stood with her arm\
      akimbo and her dreamy eyes looking past him. 'I've done all I\
      could for you,' he thought, 'since you were no higher than my\
      knee. You aren't going to\'97to\'97hurt me, are you?'\
\
      But the Goya copy answered not, brilliant in colour just\
      beginning to tone down. 'There's no real life in it,' thought\
      Soames. 'Why doesn't she come?'\
\
\
\
\
      X.\'97TRIO\
\
      Among those four Forsytes of the third, and, as one might say,\
      fourth generation, at Wansdon under the Downs, a week-end\
      prolonged unto the ninth day had stretched the crossing threads\
      of tenacity almost to snapping-point. Never had Fleur been so\
      \'93fine,\'94 Holly so watchful, Val so stable-secretive, Jon so silent\
      and disturbed. What he learned of farming in that week might have\
      been balanced on the point of a penknife and puffed off. He,\
      whose nature was essentially averse from intrigue, and whose\
      adoration of Fleur disposed him to think that any need for\
      concealing it was \'93skittles,\'94 chafed and fretted, yet obeyed,\
      taking what relief he could in the few moments when they were\
      alone. On Thursday, while they were standing in the bay window of\
      the drawing-room, dressed for dinner, she said to him:\
\
      \'93Jon, I'm going home on Sunday by the 3.40 from Paddington; if\
      you were to go home on Saturday you could come up on Sunday and\
      take me down, and just get back here by the last train, after.\
      You were going home anyway, weren't you?\'94\
\
      Jon nodded.\
\
      \'93Anything to be with you,\'94 he said; \'93only why need I pretend\'97\'94\
\
      Fleur slipped her little finger into his palm:\
\
      \'93You have no instinct, Jon; you must leave things to me. It's\
      serious about our people. We've simply got to be secret at\
      present, if we want to be together.\'94 The door was opened, and she\
      added loudly: \'93You are a duffer, Jon.\'94\
\
      Something turned over within Jon; he could not bear this\
      subterfuge about a feeling so natural, so overwhelming, and so\
      sweet.\
\
      On Friday night about eleven he had packed his bag, and was\
      leaning out of his window, half miserable, and half lost in a\
      dream of Paddington station, when he heard a tiny sound, as of a\
      finger-nail tapping on his door. He rushed to it and listened.\
      Again the sound. It was a nail. He opened. Oh! What a lovely\
      thing came in!\
\
      \'93I wanted to show you my fancy dress,\'94 it said, and struck an\
      attitude at the foot of his bed.\
\
      Jon drew a long breath and leaned against the door. The\
      apparition wore white muslin on its head, a fichu round its bare\
      neck over a wine-coloured dress, fulled out below its slender\
      waist.\
\
      It held one arm akimbo, and the other raised, right-angled,\
      holding a fan which touched its head.\
\
      \'93This ought to be a basket of grapes,\'94 it whispered, \'93but I\
      haven't got it here. It's my Goya dress. And this is the attitude\
      in the picture. Do you like it?\'94\
\
      \'93It's a dream.\'94\
\
      The apparition pirouetted. \'93Touch it, and see.\'94\
\
      Jon knelt down and took the skirt reverently.\
\
      \'93Grape colour,\'94 came the whisper, \'93all grapes\'97La Vendimia\'97the\
      vintage.\'94\
\
      Jon's fingers scarcely touched each side of the waist; he looked\
      up, with adoring eyes.\
\
      \'93Oh! Jon,\'94 it whispered; bent, kissed his forehead, pirouetted\
      again, and, gliding out, was gone.\
\
      Jon stayed on his knees, and his head fell forward against the\
      bed. How long he stayed like that he did not know. The little\
      noises\'97of the tapping nail, the feet, the skirts rustling\'97as in a\
      dream\'97went on about him; and before his closed eyes the figure\
      stood and smiled and whispered, a faint perfume of narcissus\
      lingering in the air. And his forehead where it had been kissed\
      had a little cool place between the brows, like the imprint of a\
      flower. Love filled his soul, that love of boy for girl which\
      knows so little, hopes so much, would not brush the down off for\
      the world, and must become in time a fragrant memory\'97a searing\
      passion\'97a humdrum mateship\'97or, once in many times, vintage full\
      and sweet with sunset colour on the grapes.\
\
      Enough has been said about Jon Forsyte here and in another place\
      to show what long marches lay between him and his\
      great-great-grandfather, the first Jolyon, in Dorset down by the\
      sea. Jon was sensitive as a girl, more sensitive than nine out of\
      ten girls of the day; imaginative as one of his half-sister\
      June's \'93lame duck\'94 painters; affectionate as a son of his father\
      and his mother naturally would be. And yet, in his inner tissue,\
      there was something of the old founder of his family, a secret\
      tenacity of soul, a dread of showing his feelings, a\
      determination not to know when he was beaten. Sensitive,\
      imaginative, affectionate boys get a bad time at school, but Jon\
      had instinctively kept his nature dark, and been but normally\
      unhappy there. Only with his mother had he, up till then, been\
      absolutely frank and natural; and when he went home to Robin Hill\
      that Saturday his heart was heavy because Fleur had said that he\
      must not be frank and natural with her from whom he had never yet\
      kept anything, must not even tell her that they had met again,\
      unless he found that she knew already. So intolerable did this\
      seem to him that he was very near to telegraphing an excuse and\
      staying up in London. And the first thing his mother said to him\
      was:\
\
      \'93So you've had our little friend of the confectioner's there,\
      Jon. What is she like on second thoughts?\'94\
\
      With relief, and a high colour, Jon answered:\
\
      \'93Oh! awfully jolly, Mum.\'94\
\
      Her arm pressed his.\
\
      Jon had never loved her so much as in that minute which seemed to\
      falsify Fleur's fears and to release his soul. He turned to look\
      at her, but something in her smiling face\'97something which only he\
      perhaps would have caught\'97stopped the words bubbling up in him.\
      Could fear go with a smile? If so, there was fear in her face.\
      And out of Jon tumbled quite other words, about farming, Holly,\
      and the Downs. Talking fast, he waited for her to come back to\
      Fleur. But she did not. Nor did his father mention her, though of\
      course he, too, must know. What deprivation, and killing of\
      reality was in his silence about Fleur\'97when he was so full of\
      her; when his mother was so full of Jon, and his father so full\
      of his mother! And so the trio spent the evening of that\
      Saturday.\
\
      After dinner his mother played; she seemed to play all the things\
      he liked best, and he sat with one knee clasped, and his hair\
      standing up where his fingers had run through it. He gazed at his\
      mother while she played, but he saw Fleur\'97Fleur in the moonlit\
      orchard, Fleur in the sunlit gravel-pit, Fleur in that fancy\
      dress, swaying, whispering, stooping, kissing his forehead. Once,\
      while he listened, he forgot himself and glanced at his father in\
      that other easy chair. What was Dad looking like that for? The\
      expression on his face was so sad and puzzling. It filled him\
      with a sort of remorse, so that he got up and went and sat on the\
      arm of his father's chair. From there he could not see his face;\
      and again he saw Fleur\'97in his mother's hands, slim and white on\
      the keys, in the profile of her face and her powdery hair; and\
      down the long room in the open window where the May night walked\
      outside.\
\
      When he went up to bed his mother came into his room. She stood\
      at the window, and said:\
\
      \'93Those cypresses your grandfather planted down there have done\
      wonderfully. I always think they look beautiful under a dropping\
      moon. I wish you had known your grandfather, Jon.\'94\
\
      \'93Were you married to father when he was alive?\'94 asked Jon\
      suddenly.\
\
      \'93No, dear; he died in '92\'97very old\'97eighty-five, I think.\'94\
\
      \'93Is Father like him?\'94\
\
      \'93A little, but more subtle, and not quite so solid.\'94\
\
      \'93I know, from grandfather's portrait; who painted that?\'94\
\
      \'93One of June's 'lame ducks.' But it's quite good.\'94\
\
      Jon slipped his hand through his mother's arm. \'93Tell me about the\
      family quarrel, Mum.\'94\
\
      He felt her arm quivering. \'93No, dear; that's for your Father some\
      day, if he thinks fit.\'94\
\
      \'93Then it was serious,\'94 said Jon, with a catch in his breath.\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94 And there was a silence, during which neither knew whether\
      the arm or the hand within it were quivering most.\
\
      \'93Some people,\'94 said Irene softly, \'93think the moon on her back is\
      evil; to me she's always lovely. Look at those cypress shadows!\
      Jon, Father says we may go to Italy, you and I, for two months.\
      Would you like?\'94\
\
      Jon took his hand from under her arm; his sensation was so sharp\
      and so confused. Italy with his mother! A fortnight ago it would\
      have been perfection; now it filled him with dismay; he felt that\
      the sudden suggestion had to do with Fleur. He stammered out:\
\
      \'93Oh! yes; only\'97I don't know. Ought I\'97now I've just begun? I'd\
      like to think it over.\'94\
\
      Her voice answered, cool and gentle:\
\
      \'93Yes, dear; think it over. But better now than when you've begun\
      farming seriously. Italy with you! It would be nice!\'94\
\
      Jon put his arm round her waist, still slim and firm as a girl's.\
\
      \'93Do you think you ought to leave Father?\'94 he said feebly, feeling\
      very mean.\
\
      \'93Father suggested it; he thinks you ought to see Italy at least\
      before you settle down to anything.\'94\
\
      The sense of meanness died in Jon; he knew, yes\'97he knew\'97that his\
      father and his mother were not speaking frankly, no more than he\
      himself. They wanted to keep him from Fleur. His heart hardened.\
      And, as if she felt that process going on, his mother said:\
\
      \'93Good-night, darling. Have a good sleep and think it over. But it\
      would be lovely!\'94\
\
      She pressed him to her so quickly that he did not see her face.\
      Jon stood feeling exactly as he used to when he was a naughty\
      little boy; sore because he was not loving, and because he was\
      justified in his own eyes.\
\
      But Irene, after she had stood a moment in her own room, passed\
      through the dressing-room between it and her husband's.\
\
      \'93Well?\'94\
\
      \'93He will think it over, Jolyon.\'94\
\
      Watching her lips that wore a little drawn smile, Jolyon said\
      quietly:\
\
      \'93You had better let me tell him, and have done with it. After\
      all, Jon has the instincts of a gentleman. He has only to\
      understand\'97\'94\
\
      \'93Only! He can't understand; that's impossible.\'94\
\
      \'93I believe I could have at his age.\'94\
\
      Irene caught his hand. \'93You were always more of a realist than\
      Jon; and never so innocent.\'94\
\
      \'93That's true,\'94 said Jolyon. \'93It's queer, isn't it? You and I\
      would tell our stories to the world without a particle of shame;\
      but our own boy stumps us.\'94\
\
      \'93We've never cared whether the world approves or not.\'94\
\
      \'93Jon would not disapprove of us!\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! Jolyon, yes. He's in love, I feel he's in love. And he'd\
      say: 'My mother once married without love! How could she have!'\
      It'll seem to him a crime! And so it was!\'94\
\
      Jolyon took her hand, and said with a wry smile:\
\
      \'93Ah! why on earth are we born young? Now, if only we were born\
      old and grew younger year by year, we should understand how\
      things happen, and drop all our cursed intolerance. But you know\
      if the boy is really in love, he won't forget, even if he goes to\
      Italy. We're a tenacious breed; and he'll know by instinct why\
      he's being sent. Nothing will really cure him but the shock of\
      being told.\'94\
\
      \'93Let me try, anyway.\'94\
\
      Jolyon stood a moment without speaking. Between this devil and\
      this deep sea\'97the pain of a dreaded disclosure and the grief of\
      losing his wife for two months\'97he secretly hoped for the devil;\
      yet if she wished for the deep sea he must put up with it. After\
      all, it would be training for that departure from which there\
      would be no return. And, taking her in his arms, he kissed her\
      eyes, and said:\
\
      \'93As you will, my love.\'94\
\
\
\
\
      XI.\'97DUET\
\
      That \'93small\'94 emotion, love, grows amazingly when threatened with\
      extinction. Jon reached Paddington station half an hour before\
      his time and a full week after, as it seemed to him. He stood at\
      the appointed bookstall, amid a crowd of Sunday travellers, in a\
      Harris tweed suit exhaling, as it were, the emotion of his\
      thumping heart. He read the names of the novels on the\
      book-stall, and bought one at last, to avoid being regarded with\
      suspicion by the book-stall clerk. It was called \'93The Heart of\
      the Trail!\'94 which must mean something, though it did not seem to.\
      He also bought \'93The Lady's Mirror\'94 and \'93The Landsman.\'94 Every\
      minute was an hour long, and full of horrid imaginings. After\
      nineteen had passed, he saw her with a bag and a porter wheeling\
      her luggage. She came swiftly; she came cool. She greeted him as\
      if he were a brother.\
\
      \'93First class,\'94 she said to the porter, \'93corner seats; opposite.\'94\
\
      Jon admired her frightful self-possession.\
\
      \'93Can't we get a carriage to ourselves,\'94 he whispered.\
\
      \'93No good; it's a stopping train. After Maidenhead perhaps. Look\
      natural, Jon.\'94\
\
      Jon screwed his features into a scowl. They got in\'97with two other\
      beasts!\'97oh! heaven! He tipped the porter unnaturally, in his\
      confusion. The brute deserved nothing for putting them in there,\
      and looking as if he knew all about it into the bargain.\
\
      Fleur hid herself behind \'93The Lady's Mirror.\'94 Jon imitated her\
      behind \'93The Landsman.\'94 The train started. Fleur let \'93The Lady's\
      Mirror\'94 fall and leaned forward.\
\
      \'93Well?\'94 she said.\
\
      \'93It's seemed about fifteen days.\'94\
\
      She nodded, and Jon's face lighted up at once.\
\
      \'93Look natural,\'94 murmured Fleur, and went off into a bubble of\
      laughter. It hurt him. How could he look natural with Italy\
      hanging over him? He had meant to break it to her gently, but now\
      he blurted it out.\
\
      \'93They want me to go to Italy with Mother for two months.\'94\
\
      Fleur drooped her eyelids; turned a little pale, and bit her\
      lips. \'93Oh!\'94 she said. It was all, but it was much.\
\
      That \'93Oh!\'94 was like the quick drawback of the wrist in fencing\
      ready for riposte. It came.\
\
      \'93You must go!\'94\
\
      \'93Go?\'94 said Jon in a strangled voice.\
\
      \'93Of course.\'94\
\
      \'93But\'97two months\'97it's ghastly.\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Fleur, \'93six weeks. You'll have forgotten me by then.\
      We'll meet in the National Gallery the day after you get back.\'94\
\
      Jon laughed.\
\
      \'93But suppose you've forgotten me,\'94 he muttered into the noise of\
      the train.\
\
      Fleur shook her head.\
\
      \'93Some other beast\'97\'94 murmured Jon.\
\
      Her foot touched his.\
\
      \'93No other beast,\'94 she said, lifting \'93The Lady's Mirror.\'94\
\
      The train stopped; two passengers got out, and one got in.\
\
      'I shall die,' thought Jon, 'if we're not alone at all.'\
\
      The train went on; and again Fleur leaned forward.\
\
      \'93I never let go,\'94 she said; \'93do you?\'94\
\
      Jon shook his head vehemently.\
\
      \'93Never!\'94 he said. \'93Will you write to me?\'94\
\
      \'93No; but you can\'97to my Club.\'94\
\
      She had a Club; she was wonderful!\
\
      \'93Did you pump Holly?\'94 he muttered.\
\
      \'93Yes, but I got nothing. I didn't dare pump hard.\'94\
\
      \'93What can it be?\'94 cried Jon.\
\
      \'93I shall find out all right.\'94\
\
      A long silence followed till Fleur said: \'93This is Maidenhead;\
      stand by, Jon!\'94\
\
      The train stopped. The remaining passenger got out. Fleur drew\
      down her blind.\
\
      \'93Quick!\'94 she cried. \'93Hang out! Look as much of a beast as you\
      can.\'94\
\
      Jon blew his nose, and scowled; never in all his life had he\
      scowled like that! An old lady recoiled, a young one tried the\
      handle. It turned, but the door would not open. The train moved,\
      the young lady darted to another carriage.\
\
      \'93What luck!\'94 cried Jon. \'93It Jammed.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Fleur; \'93I was holding it.\'94\
\
      The train moved out, and Jon fell on his knees.\
\
      \'93Look out for the corridor,\'94 she whispered; \'93and\'97quick!\'94\
\
      Her lips met his. And though their kiss only lasted perhaps ten\
      seconds, Jon's soul left his body and went so far beyond, that,\
      when he was again sitting opposite that demure figure, he was\
      pale as death. He heard her sigh, and the sound seemed to him the\
      most precious he had ever heard\'97an exquisite declaration that he\
      meant something to her.\
\
      \'93Six weeks isn't really long,\'94 she said; \'93and you can easily make\
      it six if you keep your head out there, and never seem to think\
      of me.\'94\
\
      Jon gasped.\
\
      \'93This is just what's really wanted, Jon, to convince them, don't\
      you see? If we're just as bad when you come back they'll stop\
      being ridiculous about it. Only, I'm sorry it's not Spain;\
      there's a girl in a Goya picture at Madrid who's like me, Father\
      says. Only she isn't\'97we've got a copy of her.\'94\
\
      It was to Jon like a ray of sunshine piercing through a fog.\
      \'93I'll make it Spain,\'94 he said, \'93Mother won't mind; she's never\
      been there. And my Father thinks a lot of Goya.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! yes, he's a painter\'97isn't he?\'94\
\
      \'93Only water-colour,\'94 said Jon, with honesty.\
\
      \'93When we come to Reading, Jon, get out first and go down to\
      Caversham lock and wait for me. I'll send the car home and we'll\
      walk by the towing-path.\'94\
\
      Jon seized her hand in gratitude, and they sat silent, with the\
      world well lost, and one eye on the corridor. But the train\
      seemed to run twice as fast now, and its sound was almost lost in\
      that of Jon's sighing.\
\
      \'93We're getting near,\'94 said Fleur; \'93the towing-path's awfully\
      exposed. One more! Oh! Jon, don't forget me.\'94\
\
      Jon answered with his kiss. And very soon, a flushed,\
      distracted-looking youth could have been seen\'97as they say\'97leaping\
      from the train and hurrying along the platform, searching his\
      pockets for his ticket.\
\
      When at last she rejoined him on the towing-path a little beyond\
      Caversham lock he had made an effort, and regained some measure\
      of equanimity. If they had to part, he would not make a scene! A\
      breeze by the bright river threw the white side of the willow\
      leaves up into the sunlight, and followed those two with its\
      faint rustle.\
\
      \'93I told our chauffeur that I was train-giddy,\'94 said Fleur. \'93Did\
      you look pretty natural as you went out?\'94\
\
      \'93I don't know. What is natural?\'94\
\
      \'93It's natural to you to look seriously happy. When I first saw\
      you I thought you weren't a bit like other people.\'94\
\
      \'93Exactly what I thought when I saw you. I knew at once I should\
      never love anybody else.\'94\
\
      Fleur laughed.\
\
      \'93We're absurdly young. And love's young dream is out of date,\
      Jon. Besides, it's awfully wasteful. Think of all the fun you\
      might have. You haven't begun, even; it's a shame, really. And\
      there's me. I wonder!\'94\
\
      Confusion came on Jon's spirit. How could she say such things\
      just as they were going to part?\
\
      \'93If you feel like that,\'94 he said, \'93I can't go. I shall tell\
      Mother that I ought to try and work. There's always the condition\
      of the world!\'94\
\
      \'93The condition of the world!\'94\
\
      Jon thrust his hands deep into his pockets.\
\
      \'93But there is,\'94 he said; \'93think of the people starving!\'94\
\
      Fleur shook her head. \'93No, no, I never, never will make myself\
      miserable for nothing.\'94\
\
      \'93Nothing! But there's an awful state of things, and of course one\
      ought to help.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! yes, I know all that. But you can't help people, Jon;\
      they're hopeless. When you pull them out they only get into\
      another hole. Look at them, still fighting and plotting and\
      struggling, though they're dying in heaps all the time. Idiots!\'94\
\
      \'93Aren't you sorry for them?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! sorry\'97yes, but I'm not going to make myself unhappy about\
      it; that's no good.\'94\
\
      And they were silent, disturbed by this first glimpse of each\
      other's natures.\
\
      \'93I think people are brutes and idiots,\'94 said Fleur stubbornly.\
\
      \'93I think they're poor wretches,\'94 said Jon. It was as if they had\
      quarrelled\'97and at this supreme and awful moment, with parting\
      visible out there in that last gap of the willows!\
\
      \'93Well, go and help your poor wretches, and don't think of me.\'94\
\
      Jon stood still. Sweat broke out on his forehead, and his limbs\
      trembled. Fleur too had stopped, and was frowning at the river.\
\
      \'93I must believe in things,\'94 said Jon with a sort of agony; \'93we're\
      all meant to enjoy life.\'94\
\
      Fleur laughed. \'93Yes; and that's what you won't do, if you don't\
      take care. But perhaps your idea of enjoyment is to make yourself\
      wretched. There are lots of people like that, of course.\'94\
\
      She was pale, her eyes had darkened, her lips had thinned. Was it\
      Fleur thus staring at the water? Jon had an unreal feeling as if\
      he were passing through the scene in a book where the lover has\
      to choose between love and duty. But just then she looked round\
      at him. Never was anything so intoxicating as that vivacious\
      look. It acted on him exactly as the tug of a chain acts on a\
      dog\'97brought him up to her with his tail wagging and his tongue\
      out.\
\
      \'93Don't let's be silly,\'94 she said, \'93time's too short. Look, Jon,\
      you can just see where I've got to cross the river. There, round\
      the bend, where the woods begin.\'94\
\
      Jon saw a gable, a chimney or two, a patch of wall through the\
      trees\'97and felt his heart sink.\
\
      \'93I mustn't dawdle any more. It's no good going beyond the next\
      hedge, it gets all open. Let's get on to it and say good-bye.\'94\
\
      They went side by side, hand in hand, silently toward the hedge,\
      where the may-flower, both pink and white, was in full bloom.\
\
      \'93My Club's the 'Talisman,' Stratton Street, Piccadilly. Letters\
      there will be quite safe, and I'm almost always up once a week.\'94\
\
      Jon nodded. His face had become extremely set, his eyes stared\
      straight before him.\
\
      \'93To-day's the twenty-third of May,\'94 said Fleur; \'93on the ninth of\
      July I shall be in front of the 'Bacchus and Ariadne' at three\
      o'clock; will you?\'94\
\
      \'93I will.\'94\
\
      \'93If you feel as bad as I it's all right. Let those people pass!\'94\
\
      A man and woman airing their children went by strung out in\
      Sunday fashion.\
\
      The last of them passed the wicket gate.\
\
      \'93Domesticity!\'94 said Fleur, and blotted herself against the\
      hawthorn hedge. The blossom sprayed out above her head, and one\
      pink cluster brushed her cheek. Jon put up his hand jealously to\
      keep it off.\
\
      \'93Good-bye, Jon.\'94 For a second they stood with hands hard clasped.\
      Then their lips met for the third time, and when they parted\
      Fleur broke away and fled through the wicket gate. Jon stood\
      where she had left him, with his forehead against that pink\
      cluster. Gone! For an eternity\'97for seven weeks all but two days!\
      And here he was, wasting the last sight of her! He rushed to the\
      gate. She was walking swiftly on the heels of the straggling\
      children. She turned her head, he saw her hand make a little\
      flitting gesture; then she sped on, and the trailing family\
      blotted her out from his view.\
\
      The words of a comic song\'97\
        \'93Paddington groan-worst ever known He gave a sepulchral\
        Paddington groan\'97\'94\
\
      came into his head, and he sped incontinently back to Reading\
      station. All the way up to London and down to Wansdon he sat with\
      \'93The Heart of the Trail\'94 open on his knee, knitting in his head a\
      poem so full of feeling that it would not rhyme.\
\
\
\
\
      XII.\'97CAPRICE\
\
      Fleur sped on. She had need of rapid motion; she was late, and\
      wanted all her wits about her when she got in. She passed the\
      islands, the station, and hotel, and was about to take the ferry,\
      when she saw a skiff with a young man standing up in it, and\
      holding to the bushes.\
\
      \'93Miss Forsyte,\'94 he said; \'93let me put you across. I've come on\
      purpose.\'94\
\
      She looked at him in blank amazement.\
\
      \'93It's all right, I've been having tea with your people. I thought\
      I'd save you the last bit. It's on my way, I'm just off back to\
      Pangbourne. My name's Mont. I saw you at the picture-gallery\'97you\
      remember\'97when your father invited me to see his pictures.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 said Fleur; \'93yes\'97the handkerchief.\'94\
\
      To this young man she owed Jon; and, taking his hand, she stepped\
      down into the skiff. Still emotional, and a little out of breath,\
      she sat silent; not so the young man. She had never heard any one\
      say so much in so short a time. He told her his age, twenty-four;\
      his weight, ten stone eleven; his place of residence, not far\
      away; described his sensations under fire, and what it felt like\
      to be gassed; criticized the Juno, mentioned his own conception\
      of that goddess; commented on the Goya copy, said Fleur was not\
      too awfully like it; sketched in rapidly the condition of\
      England; spoke of Monsieur Profond\'97or whatever his name was\'97as\
      \'93an awful sport\'94; thought her father had some \'93ripping\'94 pictures\
      and some rather \'93dug-up\'94; hoped he might row down again and take\
      her on the river because he was quite trustworthy; inquired her\
      opinion of Tchekov, gave her his own; wished they could go to the\
      Russian ballet together some time\'97considered the name Fleur\
      Forsyte simply topping; cursed his people for giving him the name\
      of Michael on the top of Mont; outlined his father, and said that\
      if she wanted a good book she should read \'93Job\'94; his father was\
      rather like Job while Job still had land.\
\
      \'93But Job didn't have land,\'94 Fleur murmured; \'93he only had flocks\
      and herds and moved on.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 answered Michael Mont, \'93I wish my gov'nor would move on.\
      Not that I want his land. Land's an awful bore in these days,\
      don't you think?\'94\
\
      \'93We never have it in my family,\'94 said Fleur. \'93We have everything\
      else. I believe one of my great-uncles once had a sentimental\
      farm in Dorset, because we came from there originally, but it\
      cost him more than it made him happy.\'94\
\
      \'93Did he sell it?\'94\
\
      \'93No; he kept it.\'94\
\
      \'93Why?\'94\
\
      \'93Because nobody would buy it.\'94\
\
      \'93Good for the old boy!\'94\
\
      \'93No, it wasn't good for him. Father says it soured him. His name\
      was Swithin.\'94\
\
      \'93What a corking name!\'94\
\
      \'93Do you know that we're getting farther off, not nearer? This\
      river flows.\'94\
\
      \'93Splendid!\'94 cried Mont, dipping his sculls vaguely; \'93it's good to\
      meet a girl who's got wit.\'94\
\
      \'93But better to meet a young man who's got it in the plural.\'94\
\
      Young Mont raised a hand to tear his hair.\
\
      \'93Look out!\'94 cried Fleur. \'93Your scull!\'94\
\
      \'93All right! It's thick enough to bear a scratch.\'94\
\
      \'93Do you mind sculling?\'94 said Fleur severely. \'93I want to get in.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 said Mont; \'93but when you get in, you see, I shan't see you\
      any more to-day. Fini, as the French girl said when she jumped on\
      her bed after saying her prayers. Don't you bless the day that\
      gave you a French mother, and a name like yours?\'94\
\
      \'93I like my name, but Father gave it me. Mother wanted me called\
      Marguerite.\'94\
\
      \'93Which is absurd. Do you mind calling me M. M. and letting me\
      call you F. F.? It's in the spirit of the age.\'94\
\
      \'93I don't mind anything, so long as I get in.\'94\
\
      Mont caught a little crab, and answered: \'93That was a nasty one!\'94\
\
      \'93Please row.\'94\
\
      \'93I am.\'94 And he did for several strokes, looking at her with\
      rueful eagerness. \'93Of course, you know,\'94 he ejaculated, pausing,\
      \'93that I came to see you, not your father's pictures.\'94\
\
      Fleur rose.\
\
      \'93If you don't row, I shall get out and swim.\'94\
\
      \'93Really and truly? Then I could come in after you.\'94\
\
      \'93Mr. Mont, I'm late and tired; please put me on shore at once.\'94\
\
      When she stepped out on to the garden landing-stage he rose, and\
      grasping his hair with both hands, looked at her.\
\
      Fleur smiled.\
\
      \'93Don't!\'94 cried the irrepressible Mont. \'93I know you're going to\
      say: 'Out, damned hair!'\'94\
\
      Fleur whisked round, threw him a wave of her hand. \'93Good-bye, Mr.\
      M.M.!\'94 she called, and was gone among the rose-trees. She looked\
      at her wrist-watch and the windows of the house. It struck her as\
      curiously uninhabited. Past six! The pigeons were just gathering\
      to roost, and sunlight slanted on the dovecot, on their snowy\
      feathers, and beyond in a shower on the top boughs of the woods.\
      The click of billiard-balls came from the ingle-nook\'97Jack\
      Cardigan, no doubt; a faint rustling, too, from an\
      eucalyptus-tree, startling Southerner in this old English garden.\
      She reached the verandah and was passing in, but stopped at the\
      sound of voices from the drawing-room to her left. Mother!\
      Monsieur Profond! From behind the verandah screen which fenced\
      the ingle-nook she heard these words:\
\
      \'93I don't, Annette.\'94\
\
      Did Father know that he called her mother \'93Annette\'94? Always on\
      the side of her Father\'97as children are ever on one side or the\
      other in houses where relations are a little strained\'97she stood,\
      uncertain. Her mother was speaking in her low, pleasing, slightly\
      metallic voice\'97one word she caught: \'93Demain.\'94 And Profond's\
      answer: \'93All right.\'94 Fleur frowned. A little sound came out into\
      the stillness. Then Profond's voice: \'93I'm takin' a small stroll.\'94\
\
      Fleur darted through the window into the morning-room. There he\
      came from the drawing-room, crossing the verandah, down the lawn;\
      and the click of billiard-balls which, in listening for other\
      sounds, she had ceased to hear, began again. She shook herself,\
      passed into the hall, and opened the drawing-room door. Her\
      mother was sitting on the sofa between the windows, her knees\
      crossed, her head resting on a cushion, her lips half parted, her\
      eyes half closed. She looked extraordinarily handsome.\
\
      \'93Ah! Here you are, Fleur! Your father is beginning to fuss.\'94\
\
      \'93Where is he?\'94\
\
      \'93In the picture-gallery. Go up!\'94\
\
      \'93What are you going to do to-morrow, Mother?\'94\
\
      \'93To-morrow? I go up to London with your aunt.\'94\
\
      \'93I thought you might be. Will you get me a quite plain parasol?\'94\
\
      \'93What colour?\'94\
\
      \'93Green. They're all going back, I suppose.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, all; you will console your father. Kiss me, then.\'94\
\
      Fleur crossed the room, stooped, received a kiss on her forehead,\
      and went out past the impress of a form on the sofa-cushions in\
      the other corner. She ran up-stairs.\
\
      Fleur was by no means the old-fashioned daughter who demands the\
      regulation of her parents' lives in accordance with the standard\
      imposed upon herself. She claimed to regulate her own life, not\
      those of others; besides, an unerring instinct for what was\
      likely to advantage her own case was already at work. In a\
      disturbed domestic atmosphere the heart she had set on Jon would\
      have a better chance. None the less was she offended, as a flower\
      by a crisping wind. If that man had really been kissing her\
      mother it was\'97serious, and her father ought to know. \'93Demain!\'94\
      \'93All right!\'94 And her mother going up to Town! She turned into her\
      bedroom and hung out of the window to cool her face, which had\
      suddenly grown very hot. Jon must be at the station by now! What\
      did her father know about Jon? Probably everything\'97pretty nearly!\
\
      She changed her dress, so as to look as if she had been in some\
      time, and ran up to the gallery.\
\
      Soames was standing stubbornly still before his Alfred\
      Stevens\'97the picture he loved best. He did not turn at the sound\
      of the door, but she knew he had heard, and she knew he was hurt.\
      She came up softly behind him, put her arms round his neck, and\
      poked her face over his shoulder till her cheek lay against his.\
      It was an advance which had never yet failed, but it failed her\
      now, and she augured the worst. \'93Well,\'94 he said stonily, \'93so\
      you've come!\'94\
\
      \'93Is that all,\'94 murmured Fleur, \'93from a bad parent?\'94 And she\
      rubbed her cheek against his.\
\
      Soames shook his head so far as that was possible.\
\
      \'93Why do you keep me on tenterhooks like this, putting me off and\
      off?\'94\
\
      \'93Darling, it was very harmless.\'94\
\
      \'93Harmless! Much you know what's harmless and what isn't.\'94\
\
      Fleur dropped her arms.\
\
      \'93Well, then, dear, suppose you tell me; and be quite frank about\
      it.\'94\
\
      And she went over to the window-seat.\
\
      Her father had turned from his picture, and was staring at his\
      feet. He looked very grey. 'He has nice small feet,' she thought,\
      catching his eye, at once averted from her.\
\
      \'93You're my only comfort,\'94 said Soames suddenly, \'93and you go on\
      like this.\'94\
\
      Fleur's heart began to beat.\
\
      \'93Like what, dear?\'94\
\
      Again Soames gave her a look which, but for the affection in it,\
      might have been called furtive.\
\
      \'93You know what I told you,\'94 he said. \'93I don't choose to have\
      anything to do with that branch of our family.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, ducky, but I don't know why I shouldn't.\'94\
\
      Soames turned on his heel.\
\
      \'93I'm not going into the reasons,\'94 he said; \'93you ought to trust\
      me, Fleur!\'94\
\
      The way he spoke those words affected Fleur, but she thought of\
      Jon, and was silent, tapping her foot against the wainscot.\
      Unconsciously she had assumed a modern attitude, with one leg\
      twisted in and out of the other, with her chin on one bent wrist,\
      her other arm across her chest, and its hand hugging her elbow;\
      there was not a line of her that was not involuted, and yet\'97in\
      spite of all\'97she retained a certain grace.\
\
      \'93You knew my wishes,\'94 Soames went on, \'93and yet you stayed on\
      there four days. And I suppose that boy came with you to-day.\'94\
\
      Fleur kept her eyes on him.\
\
      \'93I don't ask you anything,\'94 said Soames; \'93I make no inquisition\
      where you're concerned.\'94\
\
      Fleur suddenly stood up, leaning out at the window with her chin\
      on her hands. The sun had sunk behind trees, the pigeons were\
      perched, quite still, on the edge of the dove-cot; the click of\
      the billiard-balls mounted, and a faint radiance shone out below\
      where Jack Cardigan had turned the light up.\
\
      \'93Will it make you any happier,\'94 she said suddenly, \'93if I promise\
      you not to see him for say\'97the next six weeks?\'94 She was not\
      prepared for a sort of tremble in the blankness of his voice.\
\
      \'93Six weeks? Six years\'97sixty years more like. Don't delude\
      yourself, Fleur; don't delude yourself!\'94\
\
      Fleur turned in alarm.\
\
      \'93Father, what is it?\'94\
\
      Soames came close enough to see her face.\
\
      \'93Don't tell me,\'94 he said, \'93that you're foolish enough to have any\
      feeling beyond caprice. That would be too much!\'94 And he laughed.\
\
      Fleur, who had never heard him laugh like that, thought: 'Then it\
      is deep! Oh! what is it?' And putting her hand through his arm\
      she said lightly:\
\
      \'93No, of course; caprice. Only, I like my caprices and I don't\
      like yours, dear.\'94\
\
      \'93Mine!\'94 said Soames bitterly, and turned away.\
\
      The light outside had chilled, and threw a chalky whiteness on\
      the river. The trees had lost all gaiety of colour. She felt a\
      sudden hunger for Jon's face, for his hands, and the feel of his\
      lips again on hers. And pressing her arms tight across her breast\
      she forced out a little light laugh.\
\
      \'93O la! la! What a small fuss! as Profond would say. Father, I\
      don't like that man.\'94\
\
      She saw him stop, and take something out of his breast pocket.\
\
      \'93You don't?\'94 he said. \'93Why?\'94\
\
      \'93Nothing,\'94 murmured Fleur; \'93just caprice!\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Soames; \'93not caprice!\'94 And he tore what was in his\
      hands across. \'93You're right. I don't like him either!\'94\
\
      \'93Look!\'94 said Fleur softly. \'93There he goes! I hate his shoes; they\
      don't make any noise.\'94\
\
      Down in the failing light Prosper Profond moved, his hands in his\
      side pockets, whistling softly in his beard; he stopped, and\
      glanced up at the sky, as if saying: \'93I don't think much of that\
      small moon.\'94\
\
      Fleur drew back. \'93Isn't he a great cat?\'94 she whispered; and the\
      sharp click of the billiard-balls rose, as if Jack Cardigan had\
      capped the cat, the moon, caprice, and tragedy with: \'93In off the\
      red!\'94\
\
      Monsieur Profond had resumed his stroll, to a teasing little tune\
      in his beard. What was it? Oh! yes, from \'93Rigoletto\'94: \'93Donna a\
      mobile.\'94 Just what he would think! She squeezed her father's arm.\
\
      \'93Prowling!\'94 she muttered, as he turned the corner of the house.\
      It was past that disillusioned moment which divides the day and\
      night-still and lingering and warm, with hawthorn scent and lilac\
      scent clinging on the riverside air. A blackbird suddenly burst\
      out. Jon would be in London by now; in the Park perhaps, crossing\
      the Serpentine, thinking of her! A little sound beside her made\
      her turn her eyes; her father was again tearing the paper in his\
      hands. Fleur saw it was a cheque.\
\
      \'93I shan't sell him my Gauguin,\'94 he said. \'93I don't know what your\
      aunt and Imogen see in him.\'94\
\
      \'93Or Mother.\'94\
\
      \'93Your mother!\'94 said Soames.\
\
      'Poor Father!' she thought. 'He never looks happy\'97not really\
      happy. I don't want to make him worse, but of course I shall have\
      to, when Jon comes back. Oh! well, sufficient unto the night!'\
\
      \'93I'm going to dress,\'94 she said.\
\
      In her room she had a fancy to put on her \'93freak\'94 dress. It was\
      of gold tissue with little trousers of the same, tightly drawn in\
      at the ankles, a page's cape slung from the shoulders, little\
      gold shoes, and a gold-winged Mercury helmet; and all over her\
      were tiny gold bells, especially on the helmet; so that if she\
      shook her head she pealed. When she was dressed she felt quite\
      sick because Jon could not see her; it even seemed a pity that\
      the sprightly young man Michael Mont would not have a view. But\
      the gong had sounded, and she went down.\
\
      She made a sensation in the drawing-room. Winifred thought it\
      \'93Most amusing.\'94 Imogen was enraptured. Jack Cardigan called it\
      \'93stunning,\'94 \'93ripping,\'94 \'93topping,\'94 and \'93corking.\'94\
\
      Monsieur Profond, smiling with his eyes, said: \'93That's a nice\
      small dress!\'94 Her mother, very handsome in black, sat looking at\
      her, and said nothing. It remained for her father to apply the\
      test of common sense. \'93What did you put on that thing for? You're\
      not going to dance.\'94\
\
      Fleur spun round, and the bells pealed.\
\
      \'93Caprice!\'94\
\
      Soames stared at her, and, turning away, gave his arm to\
      Winifred. Jack Cardigan took her mother. Prosper Profond took\
      Imogen. Fleur went in by herself, with her bells jingling....\
\
      The \'93small\'94 moon had soon dropped down, and May night had fallen\
      soft and warm, enwrapping with its grape-bloom colour and its\
      scents the billion caprices, intrigues, passions, longings, and\
      regrets of men and women. Happy was Jack Cardigan who snored into\
      Imogen's white shoulder, fit as a flea; or Timothy in his\
      \'93mausoleum,\'94 too old for anything but baby's slumber. For so many\
      lay awake, or dreamed, teased by the criss-cross of the world.\
\
      The dew fell and the flowers closed; cattle grazed on in the\
      river meadows, feeling with their tongues for the grass they\
      could not see; and the sheep on the Downs lay quiet as stones.\
      Pheasants in the tall trees of the Pangbourne woods, larks on\
      their grassy nests above the gravel-pit at Wansdon, swallows in\
      the eaves at Robin Hill, and the sparrows of Mayfair, all made a\
      dreamless night of it, soothed by the lack of wind. The Mayfly\
      filly, hardly accustomed to her new quarters, scraped at her\
      straw a little; and the few night-flitting things\'97bats, moths,\
      owls\'97were vigorous in the warm darkness; but the peace of night\
      lay in the brain of all day-time Nature, colourless and still.\
      Men and women, alone, riding the hobby-horses of anxiety or love,\
      burned their wavering tapers of dream and thought into the lonely\
      hours.\
\
      Fleur, leaning out of her window, heard the hall clock's muffled\
      chime of twelve, the tiny splash of a fish, the sudden shaking of\
      an aspen's leaves in the puffs of breeze that rose along the\
      river, the distant rumble of a night train, and time and again\
      the sounds which none can put a name to in the darkness, soft\
      obscure expressions of uncatalogued emotions from man and beast,\
      bird and machine, or, maybe, from departed Forsytes, Darties,\
      Cardigans, taking night strolls back into a world which had once\
      suited their embodied spirits. But Fleur heeded not these sounds;\
      her spirit, far from disembodied, fled with swift wing from\
      railway-carriage to flowery hedge, straining after Jon, tenacious\
      of his forbidden image, and the sound of his voice, which was\
      taboo. And she crinkled her nose, retrieving from the perfume of\
      the riverside night that moment when his hand slipped between the\
      mayflowers and her cheek. Long she leaned out in her freak dress,\
      keen to burn her wings at life's candle; while the moths brushed\
      her cheeks on their pilgrimage to the lamp on her dressing-table,\
      ignorant that in a Forsyte's house there is no open flame. But at\
      last even she felt sleepy, and, forgetting her bells, drew\
      quickly in.\
\
      Through the open window of his room, alongside Annette's, Soames,\
      wakeful too, heard their thin faint tinkle, as it might be shaken\
      from stars, or the dewdrops falling from a flower, if one could\
      hear such sounds.\
\
      'Caprice!' he thought. 'I can't tell. She's wilful. What shall I\
      do? Fleur!'\
\
      And long into the \'93small\'94 night he brooded.\
\
\
\
\
      PART II\
\
\
\
\
\
      I.\'97MOTHER AND SON\
\
      To say that Jon Forsyte accompanied his mother to Spain\
      unwillingly would scarcely have been adequate. He went as a\
      well-natured dog goes for a walk with its mistress, leaving a\
      choice mutton-bone on the lawn. He went looking back at it.\
      Forsytes deprived of their mutton-bones are wont to sulk. But Jon\
      had little sulkiness in his composition. He adored his mother,\
      and it was his first travel. Spain had become Italy by his simply\
      saying: \'93I'd rather go to Spain, Mum; you've been to Italy so\
      many times; I'd like it new to both of us.\'94\
\
      The fellow was subtle besides being naive. He never forgot that\
      he was going to shorten the proposed two months into six weeks,\
      and must therefore show no sign of wishing to do so. For one with\
      so enticing a mutton-bone and so fixed an idea, he made a good\
      enough travelling companion, indifferent to where or when he\
      arrived, superior to food, and thoroughly appreciative of a\
      country strange to the most travelled Englishman. Fleur's wisdom\
      in refusing to write to him was profound, for he reached each new\
      place entirely without hope or fever, and could concentrate\
      immediate attention on the donkeys and tumbling bells, the\
      priests, patios, beggars, children, crowing cocks, sombreros,\
      cactus-hedges, old high white villages, goats, olive-trees,\
      greening plains, singing birds in tiny cages, watersellers,\
      sunsets, melons, mules, great churches, pictures, and swimming\
      grey-brown mountains of a fascinating land.\
\
      It was already hot, and they enjoyed an absence of their\
      compatriots. Jon, who, so far as he knew, had no blood in him\
      which was not English, was often innately unhappy in the presence\
      of his own countrymen. He felt they had no nonsense about them,\
      and took a more practical view of things than himself. He\
      confided to his mother that he must be an unsociable beast\'97it was\
      jolly to be away from everybody who could talk about the things\
      people did talk about. To which Irene had replied simply:\
\
      \'93Yes, Jon, I know.\'94\
\
      In this isolation he had unparalleled opportunities of\
      appreciating what few sons can apprehend, the whole-heartedness\
      of a mother's love. Knowledge of something kept from her made\
      him, no doubt, unduly sensitive; and a Southern people stimulated\
      his admiration for her type of beauty, which he had been\
      accustomed to hear called Spanish, but which he now perceived to\
      be no such thing. Her beauty was neither English, French,\
      Spanish, nor Italian\'97it was special! He appreciated, too, as\
      never before, his mother's subtlety of instinct. He could not\
      tell, for instance, whether she had noticed his absorption in\
      that Goya picture, \'93La Vendimia,\'94 or whether she knew that he had\
      slipped back there after lunch and again next morning, to stand\
      before it full half an hour, a second and third time. It was not\
      Fleur, of course, but like enough to give him heartache\'97so dear\
      to lovers\'97remembering her standing at the foot of his bed with\
      her hand held above her head. To keep a postcard reproduction of\
      this picture in his pocket and slip it out to look at became for\
      Jon one of those bad habits which soon or late disclose\
      themselves to eyes sharpened by love, fear, or jealousy. And his\
      mother's were sharpened by all three. In Granada he was fairly\
      caught, sitting on a sun-warmed stone bench in a little\
      battlemented garden on the Alhambra hill, whence he ought to have\
      been looking at the view. His mother, he had thought, was\
      examining the potted stocks between the polled acacias, when her\
      voice said:\
\
      \'93Is that your favourite Goya, Jon?\'94\
\
      He checked, too late, a movement such as he might have made at\
      school to conceal some surreptitious document, and answered:\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      \'93It certainly is most charming; but I think I prefer the\
      'Quitasol' Your father would go crazy about Goya; I don't believe\
      he saw them when he was in Spain in '92.\'94\
\
      In '92\'97nine years before he had been born! What had been the\
      previous existences of his father and his mother? If they had a\
      right to share in his future, surely he had a right to share in\
      their pasts. He looked up at her. But something in her face\'97a\
      look of life hard-lived, the mysterious impress of emotions,\
      experience, and suffering-seemed, with its incalculable depth,\
      its purchased sanctity, to make curiosity impertinent. His mother\
      must have had a wonderfully interesting life; she was so\
      beautiful, and so\'97so\'97but he could not frame what he felt about\
      her. He got up, and stood gazing down at the town, at the plain\
      all green with crops, and the ring of mountains glamorous in\
      sinking sunlight. Her life was like the past of this old Moorish\
      city, full, deep, remote\'97his own life as yet such a baby of a\
      thing, hopelessly ignorant and innocent! They said that in those\
      mountains to the West, which rose sheer from the blue-green\
      plain, as if out of a sea, Phoenicians had dwelt\'97a dark, strange,\
      secret race, above the land! His mother's life was as unknown to\
      him, as secret, as that Phoenician past was to the town down\
      there, whose cocks crowed and whose children played and clamoured\
      so gaily, day in, day out. He felt aggrieved that she should know\
      all about him and he nothing about her except that she loved him\
      and his father, and was beautiful. His callow ignorance\'97he had\
      not even had the advantage of the War, like nearly everybody\
      else!\'97made him small in his own eyes.\
\
      That night, from the balcony of his bedroom, he gazed down on the\
      roof of the town\'97as if inlaid with honeycomb of jet, ivory, and\
      gold; and, long after, he lay awake, listening to the cry of the\
      sentry as the hours struck, and forming in his head these lines:\
     \'93Voice in the night crying, down in the old sleeping Spanish city\
     darkened under her white stars!\
     \'93What says the voice-its clear-lingering anguish? Just the\
     watchman, telling his dateless tale of safety? Just a road-man,\
     flinging to the moon his song?\
     \'93No!  Tis one deprived, whose lover's heart is weeping, Just his\
     cry: 'How long?'\'94\
\
      The word \'93deprived\'94 seemed to him cold and unsatisfactory, but\
      \'93bereaved\'94 was too final, and no other word of two syllables\
      short-long came to him, which would enable him to keep \'93whose\
      lover's heart is weeping.\'94 It was past two by the time he had\
      finished it, and past three before he went to sleep, having said\
      it over to himself at least twenty-four times. Next day he wrote\
      it out and enclosed it in one of those letters to Fleur which he\
      always finished before he went down, so as to have his mind free\
      and companionable.\
\
      About noon that same day, on the tiled terrace of their hotel, he\
      felt a sudden dull pain in the back of his head, a queer\
      sensation in the eyes, and sickness. The sun had touched him too\
      affectionately. The next three days were passed in semi-darkness,\
      and a dulled, aching indifference to all except the feel of ice\
      on his forehead and his mother's smile. She never moved from his\
      room, never relaxed her noiseless vigilance, which seemed to Jon\
      angelic. But there were moments when he was extremely sorry for\
      himself, and wished terribly that Fleur could see him. Several\
      times he took a poignant imaginary leave of her and of the earth,\
      tears oozing out of his eyes. He even prepared the message he\
      would send to her by his mother\'97who would regret to her dying day\
      that she had ever sought to separate them\'97his poor mother! He was\
      not slow, however, in perceiving that he had now his excuse for\
      going home.\
\
      Toward half-past six each evening came a \'93gasgacha\'94 of bells\'97a\
      cascade of tumbling chimes, mounting from the city below and\
      falling back chime on chime. After listening to them on the\
      fourth day he said suddenly:\
\
      \'93I'd like to be back in England, Mum, the sun's too hot.\'94\
\
      \'93Very well, darling. As soon as you're fit to travel\'94 And at once\
      he felt better, and\'97meaner.\
\
      They had been out five weeks when they turned toward home. Jon's\
      head was restored to its pristine clarity, but he was confined to\
      a hat lined by his mother with many layers of orange and green\
      silk and he still walked from choice in the shade. As the long\
      struggle of discretion between them drew to its close, he\
      wondered more and more whether she could see his eagerness to get\
      back to that which she had brought him away from. Condemned by\
      Spanish Providence to spend a day in Madrid between their trains,\
      it was but natural to go again to the Prado. Jon was elaborately\
      casual this time before his Goya girl. Now that he was going back\
      to her, he could afford a lesser scrutiny. It was his mother who\
      lingered before the picture, saying:\
\
      \'93The face and the figure of the girl are exquisite.\'94\
\
      Jon heard her uneasily. Did she understand? But he felt once more\
      that he was no match for her in self-control and subtlety. She\
      could, in some supersensitive way, of which he had not the\
      secret, feel the pulse of his thoughts; she knew by instinct what\
      he hoped and feared and wished. It made him terribly\
      uncomfortable and guilty, having, beyond most boys, a conscience.\
      He wished she would be frank with him, he almost hoped for an\
      open struggle. But none came, and steadily, silently, they\
      travelled north. Thus did he first learn how much better than men\
      women play a waiting game. In Paris they had again to pause for a\
      day. Jon was grieved because it lasted two, owing to certain\
      matters in connection with a dressmaker; as if his mother, who\
      looked beautiful in anything, had any need of dresses! The\
      happiest moment of his travel was that when he stepped on to the\
      Folkestone boat.\
\
      Standing by the bulwark rail, with her arm in his, she said\
\
      \'93I'm afraid you haven't enjoyed it much, Jon. But you've been\
      very sweet to me.\'94\
\
      Jon squeezed her arm.\
\
      \'93Oh! yes, I've enjoyed it awfully-except for my head lately.\'94\
\
      And now that the end had come, he really had, feeling a sort of\
      glamour over the past weeks\'97a kind of painful pleasure, such as\
      he had tried to screw into those lines about the voice in the\
      night crying; a feeling such as he had known as a small boy\
      listening avidly to Chopin, yet wanting to cry. And he wondered\
      why it was that he couldn't say to her quite simply what she had\
      said to him:\
\
      \'93You were very sweet to me.\'94 Odd\'97one never could be nice and\
      natural like that! He substituted the words: \'93I expect we shall\
      be sick.\'94\
\
      They were, and reached London somewhat attenuated, having been\
      away six weeks and two days, without a single allusion to the\
      subject which had hardly ever ceased to occupy their minds.\
\
\
\
\
      II.\'97FATHERS AND DAUGHTERS\
\
      Deprived of his wife and son by the Spanish adventure, Jolyon\
      found the solitude at Robin Hill intolerable. A philosopher when\
      he has all that he wants is different from a philosopher when he\
      has not. Accustomed, however, to the idea, if not to the reality\
      of resignation, he would perhaps have faced it out but for his\
      daughter June. He was a \'93lame duck\'94 now, and on her conscience.\
      Having achieved\'97momentarily\'97the rescue of an etcher in low\
      circumstances, which she happened to have in hand, she appeared\
      at Robin Hill a fortnight after Irene and Jon had gone. June was\
      living now in a tiny house with a big studio at Chiswick. A\
      Forsyte of the best period, so far as the lack of responsibility\
      was concerned, she had overcome the difficulty of a reduced\
      income in a manner satisfactory to herself and her father. The\
      rent of the Gallery off Cork Street which he had bought for her\
      and her increased income tax happening to balance, it had been\
      quite simple\'97she no longer paid him the rent. The Gallery might\
      be expected now at any time, after eighteen years of barren\
      usufruct, to pay its way, so that she was sure her father would\
      not feel it. Through this device she still had twelve hundred a\
      year, and by reducing what she ate, and, in place of two Belgians\
      in a poor way, employing one Austrian in a poorer, practically\
      the same surplus for the relief of genius. After three days at\
      Robin Hill she carried her father back with her to Town. In those\
      three days she had stumbled on the secret he had kept for two\
      years, and had instantly decided to cure him. She knew, in fact,\
      the very man. He had done wonders with. Paul Post\'97that painter a\
      little in advance of Futurism; and she was impatient with her\
      father because his eyebrows would go up, and because he had heard\
      of neither. Of course, if he hadn't \'93faith\'94 he would never get\
      well! It was absurd not to have faith in the man who had healed\
      Paul Post so that he had only just relapsed, from having\
      overworked, or overlived, himself again. The great thing about\
      this healer was that he relied on Nature. He had made a special\
      study of the symptoms of Nature\'97when his patient failed in any\
      natural symptom he supplied the poison which caused it\'97and there\
      you were! She was extremely hopeful. Her father had clearly not\
      been living a natural life at Robin Hill, and she intended to\
      provide the symptoms. He was\'97she felt\'97out of touch with the\
      times, which was not natural; his heart wanted stimulating. In\
      the little Chiswick house she and the Austrian\'97a grateful soul,\
      so devoted to June for rescuing her that she was in danger of\
      decease from overwork\'97stimulated Jolyon in all sorts of ways,\
      preparing him for his cure. But they could not keep his eyebrows\
      down; as, for example, when the Austrian woke him at eight\
      o'clock just as he was going to sleep, or June took The Times\
      away from him, because it was unnatural to read \'93that stuff\'94 when\
      he ought to be taking an interest in \'93life.\'94 He never failed,\
      indeed, to be astonished at her resource, especially in the\
      evenings. For his benefit, as she declared, though he suspected\
      that she also got something out of it, she assembled the Age so\
      far as it was satellite to genius; and with some solemnity it\
      would move up and down the studio before him in the Fox-trot, and\
      that more mental form of dancing\'97the One-step\'97which so pulled\
      against the music, that Jolyon's eyebrows would be almost lost in\
      his hair from wonder at the strain it must impose on the dancer's\
      will-power. Aware that, hung on the line in the Water Colour\
      Society, he was a back number to those with any pretension to be\
      called artists, he would sit in the darkest corner he could find,\
      and wonder about rhythm, on which so long ago he had been raised.\
      And when June brought some girl or young man up to him, he would\
      rise humbly to their level so far as that was possible, and\
      think: 'Dear me! This is very dull for them!' Having his father's\
      perennial sympathy with Youth, he used to get very tired from\
      entering into their points of view. But it was all stimulating,\
      and he never failed in admiration of his daughter's indomitable\
      spirit. Even genius itself attended these gatherings now and\
      then, with its nose on one side; and June always introduced it to\
      her father. This, she felt, was exceptionally good for him, for\
      genius was a natural symptom he had never had\'97fond as she was of\
      him.\
\
      Certain as a man can be that she was his own daughter, he often\
      wondered whence she got herself\'97her red-gold hair, now greyed\
      into a special colour; her direct, spirited face, so different\
      from his own rather folded and subtilised countenance, her little\
      lithe figure, when he and most of the Forsytes were tall. And he\
      would dwell on the origin of species, and debate whether she\
      might be Danish or Celtic. Celtic, he thought, from her\
      pugnacity, and her taste in fillets and djibbahs. It was not too\
      much to say that he preferred her to the Age with which she was\
      surrounded, youthful though, for the greater part, it was. She\
      took, however, too much interest in his teeth, for he still had\
      some of those natural symptoms. Her dentist at once found\
      \'93Staphylococcus aureus present in pure culture\'94 (which might\
      cause boils, of course), and wanted to take out all the teeth he\
      had and supply him with two complete sets of unnatural symptoms.\
      Jolyon's native tenacity was roused, and in the studio that\
      evening he developed his objections. He had never had any boils,\
      and his own teeth would last his time. Of course\'97June\
      admitted\'97they would last his time if he didn't have them out! But\
      if he had more teeth he would have a better heart and his time\
      would be longer. His recalcitrance\'97she said\'97was a symptom of his\
      whole attitude; he was taking it lying down. He ought to be\
      fighting. When was he going to see the man who had cured Paul\
      Post? Jolyon was very sorry, but the fact was he was not going to\
      see him. June chafed. Pondridge\'97she said\'97the healer, was such a\
      fine man, and he had such difficulty in making two ends meet, and\
      getting his theories recognised. It was just such indifference\
      and prejudice as her father manifested which was keeping him\
      back. It would be so splendid for both of them!\
\
      \'93I perceive,\'94 said Jolyon, \'93that you are trying to kill two birds\
      with one stone.\'94\
\
      \'93To cure, you mean!\'94 cried June.\
\
      \'93My dear, it's the same thing.\'94\
\
      June protested. It was unfair to say that without a trial.\
\
      Jolyon thought he might not have the chance, of saying it after.\
\
      \'93Dad!\'94 cried June, \'93you're hopeless.\'94\
\
      \'93That,\'94 said Jolyon, \'93is a fact, but I wish to remain hopeless as\
      long as possible. I shall let sleeping dogs lie, my child. They\
      are quiet at present.\'94\
\
      \'93That's not giving science a chance,\'94 cried June. \'93You've no idea\
      how devoted Pondridge is. He puts his science before everything.\'94\
\
      \'93Just,\'94 replied Jolyon, puffing the mild cigarette to which he\
      was reduced, \'93as Mr. Paul Post puts his art, eh? Art for Art's\
      sake\'97Science for the sake of Science. I know those enthusiastic\
      egomaniac gentry. They vivisect you without blinking. I'm enough\
      of a Forsyte to give them the go-by, June.\'94\
\
      \'93Dad,\'94 said June, \'93if you only knew how old-fashioned that\
      sounds! Nobody can afford to be half-hearted nowadays.\'94\
\
      \'93I'm afraid,\'94 murmured Jolyon, with his smile, \'93that's the only\
      natural symptom with which Mr. Pondridge need not supply me. We\
      are born to be extreme or to be moderate, my dear; though, if\
      you'll forgive my saying so, half the people nowadays who believe\
      they're extreme are really very moderate. I'm getting on as well\
      as I can expect, and I must leave it at that.\'94\
\
      June was silent, having experienced in her time the inexorable\
      character of her father's amiable obstinacy so far as his own\
      freedom of action was concerned.\
\
      How he came to let her know why Irene had taken Jon to Spain\
      puzzled Jolyon, for he had little confidence in her discretion.\
      After she had brooded on the news, it brought a rather sharp\
      discussion, during which he perceived to the full the fundamental\
      opposition between her active temperament and his wife's\
      passivity. He even gathered that a little soreness still remained\
      from that generation-old struggle between them over the body of\
      Philip Bosinney, in which the passive had so signally triumphed\
      over the active principle.\
\
      According to June, it was foolish and even cowardly to hide the\
      past from Jon. Sheer opportunism, she called it.\
\
      \'93Which,\'94 Jolyon put in mildly, \'93is the working principle of real\
      life, my dear.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 cried June, \'93you don't really defend her for not telling\
      Jon, Dad. If it were left to you, you would.\'94\
\
      \'93I might, but simply because I know he must find out, which will\
      be worse than if we told him.\'94\
\
      \'93Then why don't you tell him? It's just sleeping dogs again.\'94\
\
      \'93My dear,\'94 said Jolyon, \'93I wouldn't for the world go against\
      Irene's instinct. He's her boy.\'94\
\
      \'93Yours too,\'94 cried June.\
\
      \'93What is a man's instinct compared with a mother's?\'94\
\
      \'93Well, I think it's very weak of you.\'94\
\
      \'93I dare say,\'94 said Jolyon, \'93I dare say.\'94\
\
      And that was all she got from him; but the matter rankled in her\
      brain. She could not bear sleeping dogs. And there stirred in her\
      a tortuous impulse to push the matter toward decision. Jon ought\
      to be told, so that either his feeling might be nipped in the\
      bud, or, flowering in spite of the past, come to fruition. And\
      she determined to see Fleur, and judge for herself. When June\
      determined on anything, delicacy became a somewhat minor\
      consideration. After all, she was Soames' cousin, and they were\
      both interested in pictures. She would go and tell him that he\
      ought to buy a Paul Post, or perhaps a piece of sculpture by\
      Boris Strumolowski, and of course she would say nothing to her\
      father. She went on the following Sunday, looking so determined\
      that she had some difficulty in getting a cab at Reading station.\
      The river country was lovely in those days of her own month, and\
      June ached at its loveliness. She who had passed through this\
      life without knowing what union was had a love of natural beauty\
      which was almost madness. And when she came to that choice spot\
      where Soames had pitched his tent, she dismissed her cab,\
      because, business over, she wanted to revel in the bright water\
      and the woods. She appeared at his front door, therefore, as a\
      mere pedestrian, and sent in her card. It was in June's character\
      to know that when her nerves were fluttering she was doing\
      something worth while. If one's nerves did not flutter, she was\
      taking the line of least resistance, and knew that nobleness was\
      not obliging her. She was conducted to a drawing-room, which,\
      though not in her style, showed every mark of fastidious\
      elegance. Thinking, 'Too much taste\'97too many knick-knacks,' she\
      saw in an old lacquer-framed mirror the figure of a girl coming\
      in from the verandah. Clothed in white, and holding some white\
      roses in her hand, she had, reflected in that silvery-grey pool\
      of glass, a vision-like appearance, as if a pretty ghost had come\
      out of the green garden.\
\
      \'93How do you do?\'94 said June, turning round. \'93I'm a cousin of your\
      father's.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, yes; I saw you in that confectioner's.\'94\
\
      \'93With my young stepbrother. Is your father in?\'94\
\
      \'93He will be directly. He's only gone for a little walk.\'94\
\
      June slightly narrowed her blue eyes, and lifted her decided\
      chin.\
\
      \'93Your name's Fleur, isn't it? I've heard of you from Holly. What\
      do you think of Jon?\'94\
\
      The girl lifted the roses in her hand, looked at them, and\
      answered calmly:\
\
      \'93He's quite a nice boy.\'94\
\
      \'93Not a bit like Holly or me, is he?\'94\
\
      \'93Not a bit.\'94\
\
      'She's cool,' thought June.\
\
      And suddenly the girl said: \'93I wish you'd tell me why our\
      families don't get on?\'94\
\
      Confronted with the question she had advised her father to\
      answer, June was silent; whether because this girl was trying to\
      get something out of her, or simply because what one would do\
      theoretically is not always what one will do when it comes to the\
      point.\
\
      \'93You know,\'94 said the girl, \'93the surest way to make people find\
      out the worst is to keep them ignorant. My father's told me it\
      was a quarrel about property. But I don't believe it; we've both\
      got heaps. They wouldn't have been so bourgeois as all that.\'94\
\
      June flushed. The word applied to her grandfather and father\
      offended her.\
\
      \'93My grandfather,\'94 she said, \'93was very generous, and my father is,\
      too; neither of them was in the least bourgeois.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, what was it then?\'94 repeated the girl: Conscious that this\
      young Forsyte meant having what she wanted, June at once\
      determined to prevent her, and to get something for herself\
      instead.\
\
      \'93Why do you want to know?\'94\
\
      The girl smelled at her roses. \'93I only want to know because they\
      won't tell me.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, it was about property, but there's more than one kind.\'94\
\
      \'93That makes it worse. Now I really must know.\'94\
\
      June's small and resolute face quivered. She was wearing a round\
      cap, and her hair had fluffed out under it. She looked quite\
      young at that moment, rejuvenated by encounter.\
\
      \'93You know,\'94 she said, \'93I saw you drop your handkerchief. Is there\
      anything between you and Jon? Because, if so, you'd better drop\
      that too.\'94\
\
      The girl grew paler, but she smiled.\
\
      \'93If there were, that isn't the way to make me.\'94\
\
      At the gallantry of that reply, June held out her hand.\
\
      \'93I like you; but I don't like your father; I never have. We may\
      as well be frank.\'94\
\
      \'93Did you come down to tell him that?\'94\
\
      June laughed. \'93No; I came down to see you.\'94\
\
      \'93How delightful of you.\'94\
\
      This girl could fence.\
\
      \'93I'm two and a half times your age,\'94 said June, \'93but I quite\
      sympathize. It's horrid not to have one's own way.\'94\
\
      The girl smiled again. \'93I really think you might tell me.\'94\
\
      How the child stuck to her point\
\
      \'93It's not my secret. But I'll see what I can do, because I think\
      both you and Jon ought to be told. And now I'll say good-bye.\'94\
\
      \'93Won't you wait and see Father?\'94\
\
      June shook her head. \'93How can I get over to the other side?\'94\
\
      \'93I'll row you across.\'94\
\
      \'93Look!\'94 said June impulsively, \'93next time you're in London, come\
      and see me. This is where I live. I generally have young people\
      in the evening. But I shouldn't tell your father that you're\
      coming.\'94\
\
      The girl nodded.\
\
      Watching her scull the skiff across, June thought: 'She's awfully\
      pretty and well made. I never thought Soames would have a\
      daughter as pretty as this. She and Jon would make a lovely\
      couple.\
\
      The instinct to couple, starved within herself, was always at\
      work in June. She stood watching Fleur row back; the girl took\
      her hand off a scull to wave farewell, and June walked languidly\
      on between the meadows and the river, with an ache in her heart.\
      Youth to youth, like the dragon-flies chasing each other, and\
      love like the sun warming them through and through. Her youth! So\
      long ago\'97when Phil and she\'97And since? Nothing\'97no one had been\
      quite what she had wanted. And so she had missed it all. But what\
      a coil was round those two young things, if they really were in\
      love, as Holly would have it\'97as her father, and Irene, and Soames\
      himself seemed to dread. What a coil, and what a barrier! And the\
      itch for the future, the contempt, as it were, for what was\
      overpast, which forms the active principle, moved in the heart of\
      one who ever believed that what one wanted was more important\
      than what other people did not want. From the bank, awhile, in\
      the warm summer stillness, she watched the water-lily plants and\
      willow leaves, the fishes rising; sniffed the scent of grass and\
      meadow-sweet, wondering how she could force everybody to be\
      happy. Jon and Fleur! Two little lame ducks\'97charming callow\
      yellow little ducks! A great pity! Surely something could be\
      done! One must not take such situations lying down. She walked\
      on, and reached a station, hot and cross.\
\
      That evening, faithful to the impulse toward direct action, which\
      made many people avoid her, she said to her father:\
\
      \'93Dad, I've been down to see young Fleur. I think she's very\
      attractive. It's no good hiding our heads under our wings, is\
      it?\'94\
\
      The startled Jolyon set down his barley-water, and began\
      crumbling his bread.\
\
      \'93It's what you appear to be doing,\'94 he said. \'93Do you realise\
      whose daughter she is?\'94\
\
      \'93Can't the dead past bury its dead?\'94\
\
      Jolyon rose.\
\
      \'93Certain things can never be buried.\'94\
\
      \'93I disagree,\'94 said June. \'93It's that which stands in the way of\
      all happiness and progress. You don't understand the Age, Dad.\
      It's got no use for outgrown things. Why do you think it matters\
      so terribly that Jon should know about his mother? Who pays any\
      attention to that sort of thing now? The marriage laws are just\
      as they were when Soames and Irene couldn't get a divorce, and\
      you had to come in. We've moved, and they haven't. So nobody\
      cares. Marriage without a decent chance of relief is only a sort\
      of slave-owning; people oughtn't to own each other. Everybody\
      sees that now. If Irene broke such laws, what does it matter?\'94\
\
      \'93It's not for me to disagree there,\'94 said Jolyon; \'93but that's all\
      quite beside the mark. This is a matter of human feeling.\'94\
\
      \'93Of course it is,\'94 cried June, \'93the human feeling of those two\
      young things.\'94\
\
      \'93My dear,\'94 said Jolyon with gentle exasperation; \'93you're talking\
      nonsense.\'94\
\
      \'93I'm not. If they prove to be really fond of each other, why\
      should they be made unhappy because of the past?\'94\
\
      \'93You haven't lived that past. I have\'97through the feelings of my\
      wife; through my own nerves and my imagination, as only one who\
      is devoted can.\'94\
\
      June, too, rose, and began to wander restlessly.\
\
      \'93If,\'94 she said suddenly, \'93she were the daughter of Philip\
      Bosinney, I could understand you better. Irene loved him, she\
      never loved Soames.\'94\
\
      Jolyon uttered a deep sound-the sort of noise an Italian peasant\
      woman utters to her mule. His heart had begun beating furiously,\
      but he paid no attention to it, quite carried away by his\
      feelings.\
\
      \'93That shows how little you understand. Neither I nor Jon, if I\
      know him, would mind a love-past. It's the brutality of a union\
      without love. This girl is the daughter of the man who once owned\
      Jon's mother as a negro-slave was owned. You can't lay that\
      ghost; don't try to, June! It's asking us to see Jon joined to\
      the flesh and blood of the man who possessed Jon's mother against\
      her will. It's no good mincing words; I want it clear once for\
      all. And now I mustn't talk any more, or I shall have to sit up\
      with this all night.\'94 And, putting his hand over his heart,\
      Jolyon turned his back on his daughter and stood looking at the\
      river Thames.\
\
      June, who by nature never saw a hornet's nest until she had put\
      her head into it, was seriously alarmed. She came and slipped her\
      arm through his. Not convinced that he was right, and she herself\
      wrong, because that was not natural to her, she was yet\
      profoundly impressed by the obvious fact that the subject was\
      very bad for him. She rubbed her cheek against his shoulder, and\
      said nothing.\
\
      After taking her elderly cousin across, Fleur did not land at\
      once, but pulled in among the reeds, into the sunshine. The\
      peaceful beauty of the afternoon seduced for a little one not\
      much given to the vague and poetic. In the field beyond the bank\
      where her skiff lay up, a machine drawn by a grey horse was\
      turning an early field of hay. She watched the grass cascading\
      over and behind the light wheels with fascination\'97it looked so\
      cool and fresh. The click and swish blended with the rustle of\
      the willows and the poplars, and the cooing of a wood-pigeon, in\
      a true river song. Alongside, in the deep green water, weeds,\
      like yellow snakes, were writhing and nosing with the current;\
      pied cattle on the farther side stood in the shade lazily\
      swishing their tails. It was an afternoon to dream. And she took\
      out Jon's letters\'97not flowery effusions, but haunted in their\
      recital of things seen and done by a longing very agreeable to\
      her, and all ending \'93Your devoted J.\'94 Fleur was not sentimental,\
      her desires were ever concrete and concentrated, but what poetry\
      there was in the daughter of Soames and Annette had certainly in\
      those weeks of waiting gathered round her memories of Jon. They\
      all belonged to grass and blossom, flowers and running water. She\
      enjoyed him in the scents absorbed by her crinkling nose. The\
      stars could persuade her that she was standing beside him in the\
      centre of the map of Spain; and of an early morning the dewy\
      cobwebs, the hazy sparkle and promise of the day down in the\
      garden, were Jon personified to her.\
\
      Two white swans came majestically by, while she was reading his\
      letters, followed by their brood of six young swans in a line,\
      with just so much water between each tail and head, a flotilla of\
      grey destroyers. Fleur thrust her letters back, got out her\
      sculls, and pulled up to the landing-stage. Crossing the lawn,\
      she wondered whether she should tell her father of June's visit.\
      If he learned of it from the butler, he might think it odd if she\
      did not. It gave her, too, another chance to startle out of him\
      the reason of the feud. She went, therefore, up the road to meet\
      him.\
\
      Soames had gone to look at a patch of ground on which the Local\
      Authorities were proposing to erect a Sanatorium for people with\
      weak lungs. Faithful to his native individualism, he took no part\
      in local affairs, content to pay the rates which were always\
      going up. He could not, however, remain indifferent to this new\
      and dangerous scheme. The site was not half a mile from his own\
      house. He was quite of opinion that the country should stamp out\
      tuberculosis; but this was not the place. It should be done\
      farther away. He took, indeed, an attitude common to all true\
      Forsytes, that disability of any sort in other people was not his\
      affair, and the State should do its business without prejudicing\
      in any way the natural advantages which he had acquired or\
      inherited. Francie, the most free-spirited Forsyte of his\
      generation (except perhaps that fellow Jolyon) had once asked him\
      in her malicious way: \'93Did you ever see the name Forsyte in a\
      subscription list, Soames?\'94 That was as it might be, but a\
      Sanatorium would depreciate the neighbourhood, and he should\
      certainly sign the petition which was being got up against it.\
      Returning with this decision fresh within him, he saw Fleur\
      coming.\
\
      She was showing him more affection of late, and the quiet time\
      down here with her in this summer weather had been making him\
      feel quite young; Annette was always running up to Town for one\
      thing or another, so that he had Fleur to himself almost as much\
      as he could wish. To be sure, young Mont had formed a habit of\
      appearing on his motor-cycle almost every other day. Thank\
      goodness, the young fellow had shaved off his half-toothbrushes,\
      and no longer looked like a mountebank! With a girl friend of\
      Fleur's who was staying in the house, and a neighbouring youth or\
      so, they made two couples after dinner, in the hall, to the music\
      of the electric pianola, which performed Fox-trots unassisted,\
      with a surprised shine on its expressive surface. Annette, even,\
      now and then passed gracefully up and down in the arms of one or\
      other of the young men. And Soames, coming to the drawing-room\
      door, would lift his nose a little sideways, and watch them,\
      waiting to catch a smile from Fleur; then move back to his chair\
      by the drawing-room hearth, to peruse The Times or some other\
      collector's price list. To his ever-anxious eyes Fleur showed no\
      signs of remembering that caprice of hers.\
\
      When she reached him on the dusty road, he slipped his hand\
      within her arm.\
\
      \'93Who, do you think, has been to see you, Dad? She couldn't wait!\
      Guess!\'94\
\
      \'93I never guess,\'94 said Soames uneasily. \'93Who?\'94\
\
      \'93Your cousin, June Forsyte.\'94\
\
      Quite unconsciously Soames gripped her arm. \'93What did she want?\'94\
\
      \'93I don't know. But it was rather breaking through the feud,\
      wasn't it?\'94\
\
      \'93Feud? What feud?\'94\
\
      \'93The one that exists in your imagination, dear.\'94\
\
      Soames dropped her arm. Was she mocking, or trying to draw him\
      on?\
\
      \'93I suppose she wanted me to buy a picture,\'94 he said at last.\
\
      \'93I don't think so. Perhaps it was just family affection.\'94\
\
      \'93She's only a first cousin once removed,\'94 muttered Soames.\
\
      \'93And the daughter of your enemy.\'94\
\
      \'93What d'you mean by that?\'94\
\
      \'93I beg your pardon, dear; I thought he was.\'94\
\
      \'93Enemy!\'94 repeated Soames. \'93It's ancient history. I don't know\
      where you get your notions.\'94\
\
      \'93From June Forsyte.\'94\
\
      It had come to her as an inspiration that if he thought she knew,\
      or were on the edge of knowledge, he would tell her.\
\
      Soames was startled, but she had underrated his caution and\
      tenacity.\
\
      \'93If you know,\'94 he said coldly, \'93why do you plague me?\'94\
\
      Fleur saw that she had overreached herself.\
\
      \'93I don't want to plague you, darling. As you say, why want to\
      know more? Why want to know anything of that 'small' mystery\'97Je\
      m'en fiche, as Profond says?\'94\
\
      \'93That chap!\'94 said Soames profoundly.\
\
      That chap, indeed, played a considerable, if invisible, part this\
      summer\'97for he had not turned up again. Ever since the Sunday when\
      Fleur had drawn attention to him prowling on the lawn, Soames had\
      thought of him a good deal, and always in connection with\
      Annette, for no reason, except that she was looking handsomer\
      than for some time past. His possessive instinct, subtle, less\
      formal, more elastic since the War, kept all misgiving\
      underground. As one looks on some American river, quiet and\
      pleasant, knowing that an alligator perhaps is lying in the mud\
      with his snout just raised and indistinguishable from a snag of\
      wood\'97so Soames looked on the river of his own existence,\
      subconscious of Monsieur Profond, refusing to see more than the\
      suspicion of his snout. He had at this epoch in his life\
      practically all he wanted, and was as nearly happy as his nature\
      would permit. His senses were at rest; his affections found all\
      the vent they needed in his daughter; his collection was well\
      known, his money well invested; his health excellent, save for a\
      touch of liver now and again; he had not yet begun to worry\
      seriously about what would happen after death, inclining to think\
      that nothing would happen. He resembled one of his own gilt-edged\
      securities, and to knock the gilt off by seeing anything he could\
      avoid seeing would be, he felt instinctively, perverse and\
      retrogressive. Those two crumpled rose-leaves, Fleur's caprice\
      and Monsieur Profond's snout, would level away if he lay on them\
      industriously.\
\
      That evening Chance, which visits the lives of even the\
      best-invested Forsytes, put a clue into Fleur's hands. Her father\
      came down to dinner without a handkerchief, and had occasion to\
      blow his nose.\
\
      \'93I'll get you one, dear,\'94 she had said, and ran upstairs. In the\
      sachet where she sought for it\'97an old sachet of very faded\
      silk\'97there were two compartments: one held handkerchiefs; the\
      other was buttoned, and contained something flat and hard. By\
      some childish impulse Fleur unbuttoned it. There was a frame and\
      in it a photograph of herself as a little girl. She gazed at it,\
      fascinated, as one is by one's own presentment. It slipped under\
      her fidgeting thumb, and she saw that another photograph was\
      behind. She pressed her own down further, and perceived a face,\
      which she seemed to know, of a young woman, very good-looking, in\
      a very old style of evening dress. Slipping her own photograph up\
      over it again, she took out a handkerchief and went down. Only on\
      the stairs did she identify that face. Surely\'97surely Jon's\
      mother! The conviction came as a shock. And she stood still in a\
      flurry of thought. Why, of course! Jon's father had married the\
      woman her father had wanted to marry, had cheated him out of her,\
      perhaps. Then, afraid of showing by her manner that she had\
      lighted on his secret, she refused to think further, and, shaking\
      out the silk handkerchief, entered the dining-room.\
\
      \'93I chose the softest, Father.\'94\
\
      \'93H'm!\'94 said Soames; \'93I only use those after a cold. Never mind!\'94\
\
      That evening passed for Fleur in putting two and two together;\
      recalling the look on her father's face in the confectioner's\
      shop\'97a look strange and coldly intimate, a queer look. He must\
      have loved that woman very much to have kept her photograph all\
      this time, in spite of having lost her. Unsparing and\
      matter-of-fact, her mind darted to his relations with her own\
      mother. Had he ever really loved her? She thought not. Jon was\
      the son of the woman he had really loved. Surely, then, he ought\
      not to mind his daughter loving him; it only wanted getting used\
      to. And a sigh of sheer relief was caught in the folds of her\
      nightgown slipping over her head.\
\
\
\
\
      III.\'97MEETINGS\
\
      Youth only recognises Age by fits and starts. Jon, for one, had\
      never really seen his father's age till he came back from Spain.\
      The face of the fourth Jolyon, worn by waiting, gave him quite a\
      shock\'97it looked so wan and old. His father's mask had been forced\
      awry by the emotion of the meeting, so that the boy suddenly\
      realised how much he must have felt their absence. He summoned to\
      his aid the thought: 'Well, I didn't want to go!' It was out of\
      date for Youth to defer to Age. But Jon was by no means typically\
      modern. His father had always been \'93so jolly\'94 to him, and to feel\
      that one meant to begin again at once the conduct which his\
      father had suffered six weeks' loneliness to cure was not\
      agreeable.\
\
      At the question, \'93Well, old man, how did the great Goya strike\
      you?\'94 his conscience pricked him badly. The great Goya only\
      existed because he had created a face which resembled Fleur's.\
\
      On the night of their return, he went to bed full of compunction;\
      but awoke full of anticipation. It was only the fifth of July,\
      and no meeting was fixed with Fleur until the ninth. He was to\
      have three days at home before going back to farm. Somehow he\
      must contrive to see her!\
\
      In the lives of men an inexorable rhythm, caused by the need for\
      trousers, not even the fondest parents can deny. On the second\
      day, therefore, Jon went to Town, and having satisfied his\
      conscience by ordering what was indispensable in Conduit Street,\
      turned his face toward Piccadilly. Stratton Street, where her\
      Club was, adjoined Devonshire House. It would be the merest\
      chance that she should be at her Club. But he dawdled down Bond\
      Street with a beating heart, noticing the superiority of all\
      other young men to himself. They wore their clothes with such an\
      air; they had assurance; they were old. He was suddenly\
      overwhelmed by the conviction that Fleur must have forgotten him.\
      Absorbed in his own feeling for her all these weeks, he had\
      mislaid that possibility. The corners of his mouth drooped, his\
      hands felt clammy. Fleur with the pick of youth at the beck of\
      her smile-Fleur incomparable! It was an evil moment. Jon,\
      however, had a great idea that one must be able to face anything.\
      And he braced himself with that dour reflection in front of a\
      bric-a-brac shop. At this high-water mark of what was once the\
      London season, there was nothing to mark it out from any other\
      except a grey top hat or two, and the sun. Jon moved on, and\
      turning the corner into Piccadilly, ran into Val Dartie moving\
      toward the Iseeum Club, to which he had just been elected.\
\
      \'93Hallo! young man! Where are you off to?\'94\
\
      Jon gushed. \'93I've just been to my tailor's.\'94\
\
      Val looked him up and down. \'93That's good! I'm going in here to\
      order some cigarettes; then come and have some lunch.\'94\
\
      Jon thanked him. He might get news of her from Val!\
\
      The condition of England, that nightmare of its Press and Public\
      men, was seen in different perspective within the tobacconist's\
      which they now entered.\
\
      \'93Yes, sir; precisely the cigarette I used to supply your father\
      with. Bless me! Mr. Montague Dartie was a customer here from\'97let\
      me see\'97the year Melton won the Derby. One of my very best\
      customers he was.\'94 A faint smile illumined the tobacconist's\
      face. \'93Many's the tip he's given me, to be sure! I suppose he\
      took a couple of hundred of these every week, year in, year out,\
      and never changed his cigarette. Very affable gentleman, brought\
      me a lot of custom. I was sorry he met with that accident. One\
      misses an old customer like him.\'94\
\
      Val smiled. His father's decease had closed an account which had\
      been running longer, probably, than any other; and in a ring of\
      smoke puffed out from that time-honoured cigarette he seemed to\
      see again his father's face, dark, good-looking, moustachioed, a\
      little puffy, in the only halo it had earned. His father had his\
      fame here, anyway\'97a man who smoked two hundred cigarettes a week,\
      who could give tips, and run accounts for ever! To his\
      tobacconist a hero! Even that was some distinction to inherit!\
\
      \'93I pay cash,\'94 he said; \'93how much?\'94\
\
      \'93To his son, sir, and cash\'97ten and six. I shall never forget Mr.\
      Montague Dartie. I've known him stand talkin' to me half an hour.\
      We don't get many like him now, with everybody in such a hurry.\
      The War was bad for manners, sir\'97it was bad for manners. You were\
      in it, I see.\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Val, tapping his knee, \'93I got this in the war before.\
      Saved my life, I expect. Do you want any cigarettes, Jon?\'94\
\
      Rather ashamed, Jon murmured, \'93I don't smoke, you know,\'94 and saw\
      the tobacconist's lips twisted, as if uncertain whether to say\
      \'93Good God!\'94 or \'93Now's your chance, sir!\'94\
\
      \'93That's right,\'94 said Val; \'93keep off it while you can. You'll want\
      it when you take a knock. This is really the same tobacco, then?\'94\
\
      \'93Identical, sir; a little dearer, that's all. Wonderful staying\
      power\'97the British Empire, I always say.\'94\
\
      \'93Send me down a hundred a week to this address, and invoice it\
      monthly. Come on, Jon.\'94\
\
      Jon entered the Iseeum with curiosity. Except to lunch now and\
      then at the Hotch-Potch with his father, he had never been in a\
      London Club. The Iseeum, comfortable and unpretentious, did not\
      move, could not, so long as George Forsyte sat on its Committee,\
      where his culinary acumen was almost the controlling force. The\
      Club had made a stand against the newly rich, and it had taken\
      all George Forsyte's prestige, and praise of him as a \'93good\
      sportsman,\'94 to bring in Prosper Profond.\
\
      The two were lunching together when the half-brothers-in-law\
      entered the dining-room, and attracted by George's forefinger,\
      sat down at their table, Val with his shrewd eyes and charming\
      smile, Jon with solemn lips and an attractive shyness in his\
      glance. There was an air of privilege around that corner table,\
      as though past masters were eating there. Jon was fascinated by\
      the hypnotic atmosphere. The waiter, lean in the chaps, pervaded\
      with such free-masonical deference. He seemed to hang on George\
      Forsyte's lips, to watch the gloat in his eye with a kind of\
      sympathy, to follow the movements of the heavy club-marked silver\
      fondly. His liveried arm and confidential voice alarmed Jon, they\
      came so secretly over his shoulder.\
\
      Except for George's \'93Your grandfather tipped me once; he was a\
      deuced good judge of a cigar!\'94 neither he nor the other past\
      master took any notice of him, and he was grateful for this. The\
      talk was all about the breeding, points, and prices of horses,\
      and he listened to it vaguely at first, wondering how it was\
      possible to retain so much knowledge in a head. He could not take\
      his eyes off the dark past master\'97what he said was so deliberate\
      and discouraging\'97such heavy, queer, smiled-out words. Jon was\
      thinking of butterflies, when he heard him say:\
\
      \'93I want to see Mr. Soames Forsyde take an interest in 'orses.\'94\
\
      \'93Old Soames! He's too dry a file!\'94\
\
      With all his might Jon tried not to grow red, while the dark past\
      master went on.\
\
      \'93His daughter's an attractive small girl. Mr. Soames Forsyde is a\
      bit old-fashioned. I want to see him have a pleasure some day.\'94\
      George Forsyte grinned.\
\
      \'93Don't you worry; he's not so miserable as he looks. He'll never\
      show he's enjoying anything\'97they might try and take it from him.\
      Old Soames! Once bit, twice shy!\'94\
\
      \'93Well, Jon,\'94 said Val, hastily, \'93if you've finished, we'll go and\
      have coffee.\'94\
\
      \'93Who were those?\'94 Jon asked, on the stairs. \'93I didn't quite\'97-\'94\
\
      \'93Old George Forsyte is a first cousin of your father's and of my\
      Uncle Soames. He's always been here. The other chap, Profond, is\
      a queer fish. I think he's hanging round Soames' wife, if you ask\
      me!\'94\
\
      Jon looked at him, startled. \'93But that's awful,\'94 he said: \'93I\
      mean\'97for Fleur.\'94\
\
      \'93Don't suppose Fleur cares very much; she's very up-to-date.\'94\
\
      \'93Her mother!\'94\
\
      \'93You're very green, Jon.\'94\
\
      Jon grew red. \'93Mothers,\'94 he stammered angrily, \'93are different.\'94\
\
      \'93You're right,\'94 said Val suddenly; \'93but things aren't what they\
      were when I was your age. There's a 'To-morrow we die' feeling.\
      That's what old George meant about my Uncle Soames. He doesn't\
      mean to die to-morrow.\'94\
\
      Jon said, quickly: \'93What's the matter between him and my father?\'94\
\
      \'93Stable secret, Jon. Take my advice, and bottle up. You'll do no\
      good by knowing. Have a liqueur?\'94\
\
      Jon shook his head.\
\
      \'93I hate the way people keep things from one,\'94 he muttered, \'93and\
      then sneer at one for being green.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, you can ask Holly. If she won't tell you, you'll believe\
      it's for your own good, I suppose.\'94\
\
      Jon got up. \'93I must go now; thanks awfully for the lunch.\'94\
\
      Val smiled up at him half-sorry, and yet amused. The boy looked\
      so upset.\
\
      \'93All right! See you on Friday.\'94\
\
      \'93I don't know,\'94 murmured Jon.\
\
      And he did not. This conspiracy of silence made him desperate. It\
      was humiliating to be treated like a child! He retraced his moody\
      steps to Stratton Street. But he would go to her Club now, and\
      find out the worst! To his enquiry the reply was that Miss\
      Forsyte was not in the Club. She might be in perhaps later. She\
      was often in on Monday\'97they could not say. Jon said he would call\
      again, and, crossing into the Green Park, flung himself down\
      under a tree. The sun was bright, and a breeze fluttered the\
      leaves of the young lime-tree beneath which he lay; but his heart\
      ached. Such darkness seemed gathered round his happiness. He\
      heard Big Ben chime \'93Three\'94 above the traffic. The sound moved\
      something in him, and, taking out a piece of paper, he began to\
      scribble on it with a pencil. He had jotted a stanza, and was\
      searching the grass for another verse, when something hard\
      touched his shoulder-a green parasol. There above him stood\
      Fleur!\
\
      \'93They told me you'd been, and were coming back. So I thought you\
      might be out here; and you are\'97it's rather wonderful!\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, Fleur! I thought you'd have forgotten me.\'94\
\
      \'93When I told you that I shouldn't!\'94\
\
      Jon seized her arm.\
\
      \'93It's too much luck! Let's get away from this side.\'94 He almost\
      dragged her on through that too thoughtfully regulated Park, to\
      find some cover where they could sit and hold each other's hands.\
\
      \'93Hasn't anybody cut in?\'94 he said, gazing round at her lashes, in\
      suspense above her cheeks.\
\
      \'93There is a young idiot, but he doesn't count.\'94\
\
      Jon felt a twitch of compassion for the-young idiot.\
\
      \'93You know I've had sunstroke; I didn't tell you.\'94\
\
      \'93Really! Was it interesting?\'94\
\
      \'93No. Mother was an angel. Has anything happened to you?\'94\
\
      \'93Nothing. Except that I think I've found out what's wrong between\
      our families, Jon.\'94\
\
      His heart began beating very fast.\
\
      \'93I believe my father wanted to marry your mother, and your father\
      got her instead.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94\
\
      \'93I came on a photo of her; it was in a frame behind a photo of\
      me. Of course, if he was very fond of her, that would have made\
      him pretty mad, wouldn't it?\'94\
\
      Jon thought for a minute. \'93Not if she loved my father best.\'94\
\
      \'93But suppose they were engaged?\'94\
\
      \'93If we were engaged, and you found you loved somebody better, I\
      might go cracked, but I shouldn't grudge it you.\'94\
\
      \'93I should. You mustn't ever do that with me, Jon.\
\
      \'93My God! Not much!\'94\
\
      \'93I don't believe that he's ever really cared for my mother.\'94\
\
      Jon was silent. Val's words\'97the two past masters in the Club!\
\
      \'93You see, we don't know,\'94 went on Fleur; \'93it may have been a\
      great shock. She may have behaved badly to him. People do.\'94\
\
      \'93My mother wouldn't.\'94\
\
      Fleur shrugged her shoulders. \'93I don't think we know much about\
      our fathers and mothers. We just see them in the light of the way\
      they treat us; but they've treated other people, you know, before\
      we were born-plenty, I expect. You see, they're both old. Look at\
      your father, with three separate families!\'94\
\
      \'93Isn't there any place,\'94 cried Jon, \'93in all this beastly London\
      where we can be alone?\'94\
\
      \'93Only a taxi.\'94\
\
      \'93Let's get one, then.\'94\
\
      When they were installed, Fleur asked suddenly: \'93Are you going\
      back to Robin Hill? I should like to see where you live, Jon. I'm\
      staying with my aunt for the night, but I could get back in time\
      for dinner. I wouldn't come to the house, of course.\'94\
\
      Jon gazed at her enraptured.\
\
      \'93Splendid! I can show it you from the copse, we shan't meet\
      anybody. There's a train at four.\'94\
\
      The god of property and his Forsytes great and small, leisured,\
      official, commercial, or professional, like the working classes,\
      still worked their seven hours a day, so that those two of the\
      fourth generation travelled down to Robin Hill in an empty\
      first-class carriage, dusty and sun-warmed, of that too early\
      train. They travelled in blissful silence, holding each other's\
      hands.\
\
      At the station they saw no one except porters, and a villager or\
      two unknown to Jon, and walked out up the lane, which smelled of\
      dust and honeysuckle.\
\
      For Jon\'97sure of her now, and without separation before him\'97it was\
      a miraculous dawdle, more wonderful than those on the Downs, or\
      along the river Thames. It was love-in-a-mist\'97one of those\
      illumined pages of Life, where every word and smile, and every\
      light touch they gave each other were as little gold and red and\
      blue butterflies and flowers and birds scrolled in among the\
      text\'97a happy communing, without afterthought, which lasted\
      thirty-seven minutes. They reached the coppice at the milking\
      hour. Jon would not take her as far as the farmyard; only to\
      where she could see the field leading up to the gardens, and the\
      house beyond. They turned in among the larches, and suddenly, at\
      the winding of the path, came on Irene, sitting on an old log\
      seat.\
\
      There are various kinds of shocks: to the vertebrae; to the\
      nerves; to moral sensibility; and, more potent and permanent, to\
      personal dignity. This last was the shock Jon received, coming\
      thus on his mother. He became suddenly conscious that he was\
      doing an indelicate thing. To have brought Fleur down openly\'97yes!\
      But to sneak her in like this! Consumed with shame, he put on a\
      front as brazen as his nature would permit.\
\
      Fleur was smiling, a little defiantly; his mother's startled face\
      was changing quickly to the impersonal and gracious. It was she\
      who uttered the first words:\
\
      \'93I'm very glad to see you. It was nice of Jon to think of\
      bringing you down to us.\'94\
\
      \'93We weren't coming to the house,\'94 Jon blurted out. \'93I just wanted\
      Fleur to see where I lived.\'94\
\
      His mother said quietly:\
\
      \'93Won't you come up and have tea?\'94\
\
      Feeling that he had but aggravated his breach of breeding, he\
      heard Fleur answer:\
\
      \'93Thanks very much; I have to get back to dinner. I met Jon by\
      accident, and we thought it would be rather jolly just to see his\
      home.\'94\
\
      How self-possessed she was!\
\
      \'93Of course; but you must have tea. We'll send you down to the\
      station. My husband will enjoy seeing you.\'94\
\
      The expression of his mother's eyes, resting on him for a moment,\
      cast Jon down level with the ground\'97a true worm. Then she led on,\
      and Fleur followed her. He felt like a child, trailing after\
      those two, who were talking so easily about Spain and Wansdon,\
      and the house up there beyond the trees and the grassy slope. He\
      watched the fencing of their eyes, taking each other in\'97the two\
      beings he loved most in the world.\
\
      He could see his father sitting under the oaktree; and suffered\
      in advance all the loss of caste he must go through in the eyes\
      of that tranquil figure, with his knees crossed, thin, old, and\
      elegant; already he could feel the faint irony which would come\
      into his voice and smile.\
\
      \'93This is Fleur Forsyte, Jolyon; Jon brought her down to see the\
      house. Let's have tea at once\'97she has to catch a train. Jon, tell\
      them, dear, and telephone to the Dragon for a car.\'94\
\
      To leave her alone with them was strange, and yet, as no doubt\
      his mother had foreseen, the least of evils at the moment; so he\
      ran up into the house. Now he would not see Fleur alone again\'97not\
      for a minute, and they had arranged no further meeting! When he\
      returned under cover of the maids and teapots, there was not a\
      trace of awkwardness beneath the tree; it was all within himself,\
      but not the less for that. They were talking of the Gallery off\
      Cork Street.\
\
      \'93We back numbers,\'94 his father was saying, \'93are awfully anxious to\
      find out why we can't appreciate the new stuff; you and Jon must\
      tell us.\'94\
\
      \'93It's supposed to be satiric, isn't it?\'94 said Fleur.\
\
      He saw his father's smile.\
\
      \'93Satiric? Oh! I think it's more than that. What do you say, Jon?\'94\
\
      \'93I don't know at all,\'94 stammered Jon. His father's face had a\
      sudden grimness.\
\
      \'93The young are tired of us, our gods and our ideals. Off with\
      their heads, they say\'97smash their idols! And let's get back\
      to-nothing! And, by Jove, they've done it! Jon's a poet. He'll be\
      going in, too, and stamping on what's left of us. Property,\
      beauty, sentiment\'97all smoke. We mustn't own anything nowadays,\
      not even our feelings. They stand in the way of\'97Nothing.\'94\
\
      Jon listened, bewildered, almost outraged by his father's words,\
      behind which he felt a meaning that he could not reach. He didn't\
      want to stamp on anything!\
\
      \'93Nothing's the god of to-day,\'94 continued Jolyon; \'93we're back\
      where the Russians were sixty years ago, when they started\
      Nihilism.\'94\
\
      \'93No, Dad,\'94 cried Jon suddenly, \'93we only want to live, and we\
      don't know how, because of the Past\'97that's all!\'94\
\
      \'93By George!\'94 said Jolyon, \'93that's profound, Jon. Is it your own?\
      The Past! Old ownerships, old passions, and their aftermath.\
      Let's have cigarettes.\'94\
\
      Conscious that his mother had lifted her hand to her lips,\
      quickly, as if to hush something, Jon handed the cigarettes. He\
      lighted his father's and Fleur's, then one for himself. Had he\
      taken the knock that Val had spoken of? The smoke was blue when\
      he had not puffed, grey when he had; he liked the sensation in\
      his nose, and the sense of equality it gave him. He was glad no\
      one said: \'93So you've begun!\'94 He felt less young.\
\
      Fleur looked at her watch, and rose. His mother went with her\
      into the house. Jon stayed with his father, puffing at the\
      cigarette.\
\
      \'93See her into the car, old man,\'94 said Jolyon; \'93and when she's\
      gone, ask your mother to come back to me.\'94\
\
      Jon went. He waited in the hall. He saw her into the car. There\
      was no chance for any word; hardly for a pressure of the hand. He\
      waited all that evening for something to be said to him. Nothing\
      was said. Nothing might have happened. He went up to bed, and in\
      the mirror on his dressing-table met himself. He did not speak,\
      nor did the image; but both looked as if they thought the more.\
\
\
\
\
      IV.\'97IN GREEN STREET\
\
      Uncertain whether the impression that Prosper Profond was\
      dangerous should be traced to his attempt to give Val the Mayfly\
      filly; to a remark of Fleur's: \'93He's like the hosts of Midian\'97he\
      prowls and prowls around\'94; to his preposterous inquiry of Jack\
      Cardigan: \'93What's the use of keepin' fit?\'94 or, more simply, to\
      the fact that he was a foreigner, or alien as it was now called.\
      Certain, that Annette was looking particularly handsome, and that\
      Soames\'97had sold him a Gauguin and then torn up the cheque, so\
      that Monsieur Profond himself had said: \'93I didn't get that small\
      picture I bought from Mr. Forsyde.\'94\
\
      However suspiciously regarded, he still frequented Winifred's\
      evergreen little house in Green Street, with a good-natured\
      obtuseness which no one mistook for naivete, a word hardly\
      applicable to Monsieur Prosper Profond. Winifred still found him\
      \'93amusing,\'94 and would write him little notes saying: \'93Come and\
      have a 'jolly' with us\'94\'97it was breath of life to her to keep up\
      with the phrases of the day.\
\
      The mystery, with which all felt him to be surrounded, was due to\
      his having done, seen, heard, and known everything, and found\
      nothing in it\'97which was unnatural. The English type of\
      disillusionment was familiar enough to Winifred, who had always\
      moved in fashionable circles. It gave a certain cachet or\
      distinction, so that one got something out of it. But to see\
      nothing in anything, not as a pose, but because there was nothing\
      in anything, was not English; and that which was not English one\
      could not help secretly feeling dangerous, if not precisely bad\
      form. It was like having the mood which the War had left,\
      seated\'97dark, heavy, smiling, indifferent\'97in your Empire chair; it\
      was like listening to that mood talking through thick pink lips\
      above a little diabolic beard. It was, as Jack Cardigan expressed\
      it\'97for the English character at large\'97\'93a bit too thick\'94\'97for if\
      nothing was really worth getting excited about, there were always\
      games, and one could make it so! Even Winifred, ever a Forsyte at\
      heart, felt that there was nothing to be had out of such a mood\
      of disillusionment, so that it really ought not to be there.\
      Monsieur Profond, in fact, made the mood too plain in a country\
      which decently veiled such realities.\
\
      When Fleur, after her hurried return from Robin Hill, came down\
      to dinner that evening, the mood was standing at the window of\
      Winifred's little drawing-room, looking out into Green Street,\
      with an air of seeing nothing in it. And Fleur gazed promptly\
      into the fireplace with an air of seeing a fire which was not\
      there.\
\
      Monsieur Profond came from the window. He was in full fig, with a\
      white waistcoat and a white flower in his buttonhole.\
\
      \'93Well, Miss Forsyde,\'94 he said, \'93I'm awful pleased to see you. Mr.\
      Forsyde well? I was sayin' to-day I want to see him have some\
      pleasure. He worries.\'94\
\
      \'93You think so?\'94 said Fleur shortly.\
\
      \'93Worries,\'94 repeated Monsieur Profond, burring the r's.\
\
      Fleur spun round. \'93Shall I tell you,\'94 she said, \'93what would give\
      him pleasure?\'94 But the words, \'93To hear that you had cleared out,\'94\
      died at the expression on his face. All his fine white teeth were\
      showing.\
\
      \'93I was hearin' at the Club to-day about his old trouble.\'94 Fleur\
      opened her eyes. \'93What do you mean?\'94\
\
      Monsieur Profond moved his sleek head as if to minimize his\
      statement.\
\
      \'93Before you were born,\'94 he said; \'93that small business.\'94\
\
      Though conscious that he had cleverly diverted her from his own\
      share in her father's worry, Fleur was unable to withstand a rush\
      of nervous curiosity. \'93Tell me what you heard.\'94\
\
      \'93Why!\'94 murmured Monsieur Profond, \'93you know all that.\'94\
\
      \'93I expect I do. But I should like to know that you haven't heard\
      it all wrong.\'94\
\
      \'93His first wife,\'94 murmured Monsieur Profond.\
\
      Choking back the words, \'93He was never married before,\'94 she said:\
      \'93Well, what about her?\'94\
\
      \'93Mr. George Forsyde was tellin' me about your father's first wife\
      marryin' his cousin Jolyon afterward. It was a small bit\
      unpleasant, I should think. I saw their boy\'97nice boy!\'94\
\
      Fleur looked up. Monsieur Profond was swimming, heavily\
      diabolical, before her. That\'97the reason! With the most heroic\
      effort of her life so far, she managed to arrest that swimming\
      figure. She could not tell whether he had noticed. And just then\
      Winifred came in.\
\
      \'93Oh! here you both are already; Imogen and I have had the most\
      amusing afternoon at the Babies' bazaar.\'94\
\
      \'93What babies?\'94 said Fleur mechanically.\
\
      \'93The 'Save the Babies.' I got such a bargain, my dear. A piece of\
      old Armenian work\'97from before the Flood. I want your opinion on\
      it, Prosper.\'94\
\
      \'93Auntie,\'94 whispered Fleur suddenly.\
\
      At the tone in the girl's voice Winifred closed in on her.'\
\
      \'93What's the matter? Aren't you well?\'94\
\
      Monsieur Profond had withdrawn into the window, where he was\
      practically out of hearing.\
\
      \'93Auntie, he-he told me that father has been married before. Is it\
      true that he divorced her, and she married Jon Forsyte's father?\'94\
\
      Never in all the life of the mother of four little Darties had\
      Winifred felt more seriously embarrassed. Her niece's face was so\
      pale, her eyes so dark, her voice so whispery and strained.\
\
      \'93Your father didn't wish you to hear,\'94 she said, with all the\
      aplomb she could muster. \'93These things will happen. I've often\
      told him he ought to let you know.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 said Fleur, and that was all, but it made Winifred pat her\
      shoulder\'97a firm little shoulder, nice and white! She never could\
      help an appraising eye and touch in the matter of her niece, who\
      would have to be married, of course\'97though not to that boy Jon.\
\
      \'93We've forgotten all about it years and years ago,\'94 she said\
      comfortably. \'93Come and have dinner!\'94\
\
      \'93No, Auntie. I don't feel very well. May I go upstairs?\'94\
\
      \'93My dear!\'94 murmured Winifred, concerned, \'93you're not taking this\
      to heart? Why, you haven't properly come out yet! That boy's a\
      child!\'94\
\
      \'93What boy? I've only got a headache. But I can't stand that man\
      to-night.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, well,\'94 said Winifred, \'93go and lie down. I'll send you some\
      bromide, and I shall talk to Prosper Profond. What business had\
      he to gossip? Though I must say I think it's much better you\
      should know.\'94\
\
      Fleur smiled. \'93Yes,\'94 she said, and slipped from the room.\
\
      She went up with her head whirling, a dry sensation in her\
      throat, a guttered frightened feeling in her breast. Never in her\
      life as yet had she suffered from even momentary fear that she\
      would not get what she had set her heart on. The sensations of\
      the afternoon had been full and poignant, and this gruesome\
      discovery coming on the top of them had really made her head\
      ache. No wonder her father had hidden that photograph, so\
      secretly behind her own-ashamed of having kept it! But could he\
      hate Jon's mother and yet keep her photograph? She pressed her\
      hands over her forehead, trying to see things clearly. Had they\
      told Jon\'97had her visit to Robin Hill forced them to tell him?\
      Everything now turned on that! She knew, they all knew,\
      except\'97perhaps\'97Jon!\
\
      She walked up and down, biting her lip and thinking desperately\
      hard. Jon loved his mother. If they had told him, what would he\
      do? She could not tell. But if they had not told him, should she\
      not\'97could she not get him for herself\'97get married to him, before\
      he knew? She searched her memories of Robin Hill. His mother's\
      face so passive\'97with its dark eyes and as if powdered hair, its\
      reserve, its smile\'97baffled her; and his father's\'97kindly, sunken,\
      ironic. Instinctively she felt they would shrink from telling\
      Jon, even now, shrink from hurting him\'97for of course it would\
      hurt him awfully to know!\
\
      Her aunt must be made not to tell her father that she knew. So\
      long as neither she herself nor Jon were supposed to know, there\
      was still a chance\'97freedom to cover one's tracks, and get what\
      her heart was set on. But she was almost overwhelmed by her\
      isolation. Every one's hand was against her\'97every one's! It was\
      as Jon had said\'97he and she just wanted to live and the past was\
      in their way, a past they hadn't shared in, and didn't\
      understand! Oh! What a shame! And suddenly she thought of June.\
      Would she help them? For somehow June had left on her the\
      impression that she would be sympathetic with their love,\
      impatient of obstacle. Then, instinctively, she thought: 'I won't\
      give anything away, though, even to her. I daren't. I mean to\
      have Jon; against them all.'\
\
      Soup was brought up to her, and one of Winifred's pet headache\
      cachets. She swallowed both. Then Winifred herself appeared.\
      Fleur opened her campaign with the words:\
\
      \'93You know, Auntie, I do wish people wouldn't think I'm in love\
      with that boy. Why, I've hardly seen him!\'94\
\
      Winifred, though experienced, was not \'93fine.\'94 She accepted the\
      remark with considerable relief. Of course, it was not pleasant\
      for the girl to hear of the family scandal, and she set herself\
      to minimise the matter, a task for which she was eminently\
      qualified, \'93raised\'94 fashionably under a comfortable mother and a\
      father whose nerves might not be shaken, and for many years the\
      wife of Montague Dartie. Her description was a masterpiece of\
      understatement. Fleur's father's first wife had been very\
      foolish. There had been a young man who had got run over, and she\
      had left Fleur's father. Then, years after, when it might all\
      have come\'97right again, she had taken up with their cousin Jolyon;\
      and, of course, her father had been obliged to have a divorce.\
      Nobody remembered anything of it now, except just the family.\
      And, perhaps, it had all turned out for the best; her father had\
      Fleur; and Jolyon and Irene had been quite happy, they said, and\
      their boy was a nice boy. \'93Val having Holly, too, is a sort of\
      plaster, don't you know?\'94 With these soothing words, Winifred\
      patted her niece's shoulder; thought: 'She's a nice, plump little\
      thing!' and went back to Prosper Profond, who, in spite of his\
      indiscretion, was very \'93amusing\'94 this evening.\
\
      For some minutes after her aunt had gone Fleur remained under\
      influence of bromide material and spiritual. But then reality\
      came back. Her aunt had left out all that mattered\'97all the\
      feeling, the hate, the love, the unforgivingness of passionate\
      hearts. She, who knew so little of life, and had touched only the\
      fringe of love, was yet aware by instinct that words have as\
      little relation to fact and feeling as coin to the bread it buys.\
      'Poor Father!' she thought. 'Poor me! Poor Jon! But I don't care,\
      I mean to have him!' From the window of her darkened room she saw\
      \'93that man\'94 issue from the door below and \'93prowl\'94 away. If he and\
      her mother\'97how would that affect her chance? Surely it must make\
      her father cling to her more closely, so that he would consent in\
      the end to anything she wanted, or become reconciled the sooner\
      to what she did without his knowledge.\
\
      She took some earth from the flower-box in the window, and with\
      all her might flung it after that disappearing figure. It fell\
      short, but the action did her good.\
\
      And a little puff of air came up from Green Street, smelling of\
      petrol, not sweet.\
\
\
\
\
      V.\'97PURELY FORSYTE AFFAIRS\
\
      Soames, coming up to the City, with the intention of calling in\
      at Green Street at the end of his day and taking Fleur back home\
      with him, suffered from rumination. Sleeping partner that he was,\
      he seldom visited the City now, but he still had a room of his\
      own at Cuthcott, Kingson and Forsyte's, and one special clerk and\
      a half assigned to the management of purely Forsyte affairs. They\
      were somewhat in flux just now\'97an auspicious moment for the\
      disposal of house property. And Soames was unloading the estates\
      of his father and Uncle Roger, and to some extent of his Uncle\
      Nicholas. His shrewd and matter-of-course probity in all money\
      concerns had made him something of an autocrat in connection with\
      these trusts. If Soames thought this or thought that, one had\
      better save oneself the bother of thinking too. He guaranteed, as\
      it were, irresponsibility to numerous Forsytes of the third and\
      fourth generations. His fellow trustees, such as his cousins\
      Roger or Nicholas, his cousins-in-law Tweetyman and Spender, or\
      his sister Cicely's husband, all trusted him; he signed first,\
      and where he signed first they signed after, and nobody was a\
      penny the worse. Just now they were all a good many pennies the\
      better, and Soames was beginning to see the close of certain\
      trusts, except for distribution of the income from securities as\
      gilt-edged as was compatible with the period.\
\
      Passing the more feverish parts of the City toward the most\
      perfect backwater in London, he ruminated. Money was\
      extraordinarily tight; and morality extraordinarily loose! The\
      War had done it. Banks were not lending; people breaking\
      contracts all over the place. There was a feeling in the air and\
      a look on faces that he did not like. The country seemed in for a\
      spell of gambling and bankruptcies. There was satisfaction in the\
      thought that neither he nor his trusts had an investment which\
      could be affected by anything less maniacal than national\
      repudiation or a levy on capital. If Soames had faith, it was in\
      what he called \'93English common sense\'94\'97or the power to have\
      things, if not one way then another. He might\'97like his father\
      James before him\'97say he didn't know what things were coming to,\
      but he never in his heart believed they were. If it rested with\
      him, they wouldn't\'97and, after all, he was only an Englishman like\
      any other, so quietly tenacious of what he had that he knew he\
      would never really part with it without something more or less\
      equivalent in exchange. His mind was essentially equilibristic in\
      material matters, and his way of putting the national situation\
      difficult to refute in a world composed of human beings. Take his\
      own case, for example! He was well off. Did that do anybody harm?\
      He did not eat ten meals a day; he ate no more than, perhaps not\
      so much as, a poor man. He spent no money on vice; breathed no\
      more air, used no more water to speak of than the mechanic or the\
      porter. He certainly had pretty things about him, but they had\
      given employment in the making, and somebody must use them. He\
      bought pictures, but Art must be encouraged. He was, in fact, an\
      accidental channel through which money flowed, employing labour.\
      What was there objectionable in that? In his charge money was in\
      quicker and more useful flux than it would be in charge of the\
      State and a lot of slow-fly money-sucking officials. And as to\
      what he saved each year\'97it was just as much in flux as what he\
      didn't save, going into Water Board or Council Stocks, or\
      something sound and useful. The State paid him no salary for\
      being trustee of his own or other people's money he did all that\
      for nothing. Therein lay the whole case against\
      nationalisation\'97owners of private property were unpaid, and yet\
      had every incentive to quicken up the flux. Under\
      nationalisation\'97just the opposite! In a country smarting from\
      officialism he felt that he had a strong case.\
\
      It particularly annoyed him, entering that backwater of perfect\
      peace, to think that a lot of unscrupulous Trusts and\
      Combinations had been cornering the market in goods of all kinds,\
      and keeping prices at an artificial height. Such abusers of the\
      individualistic system were the ruffians who caused all the\
      trouble, and it was some satisfaction to see them getting into a\
      stew at last lest the whole thing might come down with a run\'97and\
      land them in the soup.\
\
      The offices of Cuthcott, Kingson and Forsyte occupied the ground\
      and first floors of a house on the right-hand side; and,\
      ascending to his room, Soames thought: 'Time we had a coat of\
      paint.'\
\
      His old clerk Gradman was seated, where he always was, at a huge\
      bureau with countless pigeonholes. Half-the-clerk stood beside\
      him, with a broker's note recording investment of the proceeds\
      from sale of the Bryanston Square house, in Roger Forsyte's\
      estate. Soames took it, and said:\
\
      \'93Vancouver City Stock. H'm. It's down today!\'94\
\
      With a sort of grating ingratiation old Gradman answered him:\
\
      \'93Ye-es; but everything's down, Mr. Soames.\'94 And half-the-clerk\
      withdrew.\
\
      Soames skewered the document on to a number of other papers and\
      hung up his hat.\
\
      \'93I want to look at my Will and Marriage Settlement, Gradman.\'94\
\
      Old Gradman, moving to the limit of his swivel chair, drew out\
      two drafts from the bottom lefthand drawer. Recovering his body,\
      he raised his grizzle-haired face, very red from stooping.\
\
      \'93Copies, Sir.\'94\
\
      Soames took them. It struck him suddenly how like Gradman was to\
      the stout brindled yard dog they had been wont to keep on his\
      chain at The Shelter, till one day Fleur had come and insisted it\
      should be let loose, so that it had at once bitten the cook and\
      been destroyed. If you let Gradman off his chain, would he bite\
      the cook?\
\
      Checking this frivolous fancy, Soames unfolded his Marriage\
      Settlement. He had not looked at it for over eighteen years, not\
      since he remade his Will when his father died and Fleur was born.\
      He wanted to see whether the words \'93during coverture\'94 were in.\
      Yes, they were\'97odd expression, when you thought of it, and\
      derived perhaps from horse-breeding! Interest on fifteen thousand\
      pounds (which he paid her without deducting income tax) so long\
      as she remained his wife, and afterward during widowhood \'93dum\
      casta\'94\'97old-fashioned and rather pointed words, put in to insure\
      the conduct of Fleur's mother. His Will made it up to an annuity\
      of a thousand under the same conditions. All right! He returned\
      the copies to Gradman, who took them without looking up, swung\
      the chair, restored the papers to their drawer, and went on\
      casting up.\
\
      \'93Gradman! I don't like the condition of the country; there are a\
      lot of people about without any common sense. I want to find a\
      way by which I can safeguard Miss Fleur against anything which\
      might arise.\'94\
\
      Gradman wrote the figure \'932\'94 on his blotting-paper.\
\
      \'93Ye-es,\'94 he said; \'93there's a nahsty spirit.\'94\
\
      \'93The ordinary restraint against anticipation doesn't meet the\
      case.\'94\
\
      \'93Nao,\'94 said Gradman.\
\
      \'93Suppose those Labour fellows come in, or worse! It's these\
      people with fixed ideas who are the danger. Look at Ireland!\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 said Gradman.\
\
      \'93Suppose I were to make a settlement on her at once with myself\
      as beneficiary for life, they couldn't take anything but the\
      interest from me, unless of course they alter the law.\'94\
\
      Gradman moved his head and smiled.\
\
      \'93Ah!\'94 he said, \'93they wouldn't do tha-at!\'94\
\
      \'93I don't know,\'94 muttered Soames; \'93I don't trust them.\'94\
\
      \'93It'll take two years, sir, to be valid against death duties.\'94\
\
      Soames sniffed. Two years! He was only sixty-five!\
\
      \'93That's not the point. Draw a form of settlement that passes all\
      my property to Miss Fleur's children in equal shares, with\
      antecedent life-interests first to myself and then to her without\
      power of anticipation, and add a clause that in the event of\
      anything happening to divert her life-interest, that interest\
      passes to the trustees, to apply for her benefit, in their\
      absolute discretion.\'94\
\
      Gradman grated: \'93Rather extreme at your age, sir; you lose\
      control.\'94\
\
      \'93That's my business,\'94 said Soames sharply.\
\
      Gradman wrote on a piece of paper:\
      \'93Life-interest\'97anticipation\'97divert interest\'97absolute\
      discretion....\'94 and said:\
\
      \'93What trustees? There's young Mr. Kingson; he's a nice steady\
      young fellow.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, he might do for one. I must have three. There isn't a\
      Forsyte now who appeals to me.\'94\
\
      \'93Not young Mr. Nicholas? He's at the Bar. We've given 'im\
      briefs.\'94\
\
      \'93He'll never set the Thames on fire,\'94 said Soames.\
\
      A smile oozed out on Gradman's face, greasy from countless\
      mutton-chops, the smile of a man who sits all day.\
\
      \'93You can't expect it, at his age, Mr. Soames.\'94\
\
      \'93Why? What is he? Forty?\'94\
\
      \'93Ye-es, quite a young fellow.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, put him in; but I want somebody who'll take a personal\
      interest. There's no one that I can see.\'94\
\
      \'93What about Mr. Valerius, now he's come home?\'94\
\
      \'93Val Dartie? With that father?\'94\
\
      \'93We-ell,\'94 murmured Gradman, \'93he's been dead seven years\'97the\
      Statute runs against him.\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Soames. \'93I don't like the connection.\'94 He rose.\
      Gradman said suddenly:\
\
      \'93If they were makin' a levy on capital, they could come on the\
      trustees, sir. So there you'd be just the same. I'd think it\
      over, if I were you.\'94\
\
      \'93That's true,\'94 said Soames. \'93I will. What have you done about\
      that dilapidation notice in Vere Street?\'94\
\
      \'93I 'aven't served it yet. The party's very old. She won't want to\
      go out at her age.\'94\
\
      \'93I don't know. This spirit of unrest touches every one.\'94\
\
      \'93Still, I'm lookin' at things broadly, sir. She's eighty-one.\'94\
\
      \'93Better serve it,\'94 said Soames, \'93and see what she says. Oh! and\
      Mr. Timothy? Is everything in order in case of\'97\'94\
\
      \'93I've got the inventory of his estate all ready; had the\
      furniture and pictures valued so that we know what reserves to\
      put on. I shall be sorry when he goes, though. Dear me! It is a\
      time since I first saw Mr. Timothy!\'94\
\
      \'93We can't live for ever,\'94 said Soames, taking down his hat.\
\
      \'93Nao,\'94 said Gradman; \'93but it'll be a pity\'97the last of the old\
      family! Shall I take up the matter of that nuisance in Old\
      Compton Street? Those organs\'97they're nahsty things.\'94\
\
      \'93Do. I must call for Miss Fleur and catch the four o'clock.\
      Good-day, Gradman.\'94\
\
      \'93Good-day, Mr. Soames. I hope Miss Fleur\'97\'94\
\
      \'93Well enough, but gads about too much.\'94\
\
      \'93Ye-es,\'94 grated Gradman; \'93she's young.\'94\
\
      Soames went out, musing: \'93Old Gradman! If he were younger I'd put\
      him in the trust. There's nobody I can depend on to take a real\
      interest.\'94\
\
      Leaving the bilious and mathematical exactitude, the preposterous\
      peace of that backwater, he thought suddenly: 'During coverture!\
      Why can't they exclude fellows like Profond, instead of a lot of\
      hard-working Germans?' and was surprised at the depth of\
      uneasiness which could provoke so unpatriotic a thought. But\
      there it was! One never got a moment of real peace. There was\
      always something at the back of everything! And he made his way\
      toward Green Street.\
\
      Two hours later by his watch, Thomas Gradman, stirring in his\
      swivel chair, closed the last drawer of his bureau, and putting\
      into his waistcoat pocket a bunch of keys so fat that they gave\
      him a protuberance on the liver side, brushed his old top hat\
      round with his sleeve, took his umbrella, and descended. Thick,\
      short, and buttoned closely into his old frock coat, he walked\
      toward Covent Garden market. He never missed that daily promenade\
      to the Tube for Highgate, and seldom some critical transaction on\
      the way in connection with vegetables and fruit. Generations\
      might be born, and hats might change, wars be fought, and\
      Forsytes fade away, but Thomas Gradman, faithful and grey, would\
      take his daily walk and buy his daily vegetable. Times were not\
      what they were, and his son had lost a leg, and they never gave\
      him those nice little plaited baskets to carry the stuff in now,\
      and these Tubes were convenient things\'97still he mustn't complain;\
      his health was good considering his time of life, and after\
      fifty-four years in the Law he was getting a round eight hundred\
      a year and a little worried of late, because it was mostly\
      collector's commission on the rents, and with all this conversion\
      of Forsyte property going on, it looked like drying up, and the\
      price of living still so high; but it was no good worrying\'97\'93The\
      good God made us all\'94\'97as he was in the habit of saying; still,\
      house property in London\'97he didn't know what Mr. Roger or Mr.\
      James would say if they could see it being sold like this\'97seemed\
      to show a lack of faith; but Mr. Soames\'97he worried. Life and\
      lives in being and twenty-one years after\'97beyond that you\
      couldn't go; still, he kept his health wonderfully\'97and Miss Fleur\
      was a pretty little thing\'97she was; she'd marry; but lots of\
      people had no children nowadays\'97he had had his first child at\
      twenty-two; and Mr. Jolyon, married while he was at Cambridge,\
      had his child the same year\'97gracious Peter! That was back in '69,\
      a long time before old Mr. Jolyon\'97fine judge of property\'97had\
      taken his Will away from Mr. James\'97dear, yes! Those were the days\
      when they were buyin' property right and left, and none of this\
      khaki and fallin' over one another to get out of things; and\
      cucumbers at twopence; and a melon\'97the old melons, that made your\
      mouth water! Fifty years since he went into Mr. James' office,\
      and Mr. James had said to him: \'93Now, Gradman, you're only a\
      shaver\'97you pay attention, and you'll make your five hundred a\
      year before you've done.\'94 And he had, and feared God, and served\
      the Forsytes, and kept a vegetable diet at night. And, buying a\
      copy of John Bull\'97not that he approved of it, an extravagant\
      affair\'97he entered the Tube elevator with his mere brown-paper\
      parcel, and was borne down into the bowels of the earth.\
\
\
\
\
      VI.\'97SOAMES' PRIVATE LIFE\
\
      On his way to Green Street it occurred to Soames that he ought to\
      go into Dumetrius' in Suffolk Street about the possibility of the\
      Bolderby Old Crome. Almost worth while to have fought the war to\
      have the Bolderby Old Crome, as it were, in flux! Old Bolderby\
      had died, his son and grandson had been killed\'97a cousin was\
      coming into the estate, who meant to sell it, some said because\
      of the condition of England, others said because he had asthma.\
\
      If Dumetrius once got hold of it the price would become\
      prohibitive; it was necessary for Soames to find out whether\
      Dumetrius had got it, before he tried to get it himself. He\
      therefore confined himself to discussing with Dumetrius whether\
      Monticellis would come again now that it was the fashion for a\
      picture to be anything except a picture; and the future of Johns,\
      with a side-slip into Buxton Knights. It was only when leaving\
      that he added: \'93So they're not selling the Bolderby Old Crome,\
      after all?\'94 In sheer pride of racial superiority, as he had\
      calculated would be the case, Dumetrius replied:\
\
      \'93Oh! I shall get it, Mr. Forsyte, sir!\'94\
\
      The flutter of his eyelid fortified Soames in a resolution to\
      write direct to the new Bolderby, suggesting that the only\
      dignified way of dealing with an Old Crome was to avoid dealers.\
      He therefore said, \'93Well, good-day!\'94 and went, leaving Dumetrius\
      the wiser.\
\
      At Green Street he found that Fleur was out and would be all the\
      evening; she was staying one more night in London. He cabbed on\
      dejectedly, and caught his train.\
\
      He reached his house about six o'clock. The air was heavy, midges\
      biting, thunder about. Taking his letters he went up to his\
      dressing-room to cleanse himself of London.\
\
      An uninteresting post. A receipt, a bill for purchases on behalf\
      of Fleur. A circular about an exhibition of etchings. A letter\
      beginning:\
\
      \'93SIR,\
\
      \'93I feel it my duty...\'94\
\
      That would be an appeal or something unpleasant. He looked at\
      once for the signature. There was none! Incredulously he turned\
      the page over and examined each corner. Not being a public man,\
      Soames had never yet had an anonymous letter, and his first\
      impulse was to tear it up, as a dangerous thing; his second to\
      read it, as a thing still more dangerous.\
\
      \'93SIR,\
\
      \'93I feel it my duty to inform you that having no interest in the\
      matter your lady is carrying on with a foreigner\'97\'94\
\
      Reaching that word Soames stopped mechanically and examined the\
      postmark. So far as he could pierce the impenetrable disguise in\
      which the Post Office had wrapped it, there was something with a\
      \'93sea\'94 at the end and a \'93t\'94 in it. Chelsea? No! Battersea?\
      Perhaps! He read on.\
\
      \'93These foreigners are all the same. Sack the lot. This one meets\
      your lady twice a week. I know it of my own knowledge\'97and to see\
      an Englishman put on goes against the grain. You watch it and see\
      if what I say isn't true. I shouldn't meddle if it wasn't a dirty\
      foreigner that's in it.\
\
      \'93Yours obedient.\'94\
\
      The sensation with which Soames dropped the letter was similar to\
      that he would have had entering his bedroom and finding it full\
      of black-beetles. The meanness of anonymity gave a shuddering\
      obscenity to the moment. And the worst of it was that this shadow\
      had been at the back of his mind ever since the Sunday evening\
      when Fleur had pointed down at Prosper Profond strolling on the\
      lawn, and said: \'93Prowling cat!\'94 Had he not in connection\
      therewith, this very day, perused his Will and Marriage\
      Settlement? And now this anonymous ruffian, with nothing to gain,\
      apparently, save the venting of his spite against foreigners, had\
      wrenched it out of the obscurity in which he had hoped and wished\
      it would remain. To have such knowledge forced on him, at his\
      time of life, about Fleur's mother! He picked the letter up from\
      the carpet, tore it across, and then, when it hung together by\
      just the fold at the back, stopped tearing, and reread it. He was\
      taking at that moment one of the decisive resolutions of his\
      life. He would not be forced into another scandal. No! However he\
      decided to deal with this matter\'97and it required the most\
      far-sighted and careful consideration he would do nothing that\
      might injure Fleur. That resolution taken, his mind answered the\
      helm again, and he made his ablutions. His hands trembled as he\
      dried them. Scandal he would not have, but something must be done\
      to stop this sort of thing! He went into his wife's room and\
      stood looking around him. The idea of searching for anything\
      which would incriminate, and entitle him to hold a menace over\
      her, did not even come to him. There would be nothing\'97she was\
      much too practical. The idea of having her watched had been\
      dismissed before it came\'97too well he remembered his previous\
      experience of that. No! He had nothing but this torn-up letter\
      from some anonymous ruffian, whose impudent intrusion into his\
      private life he so violently resented. It was repugnant to him to\
      make use of it, but he might have to. What a mercy Fleur was not\
      at home to-night! A tap on the door broke up his painful\
      cogitations.\
\
      \'93Mr. Michael Mont, sir, is in the drawing-room. Will you see\
      him?\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Soames; \'93yes. I'll come down.\'94\
\
      Anything that would take his mind off for a few minutes!\
\
      Michael Mont in flannels stood on the verandah smoking a\
      cigarette. He threw it away as Soames came up, and ran his hand\
      through his hair.\
\
      Soames' feeling toward this young man was singular. He was no\
      doubt a rackety, irresponsible young fellow according to old\
      standards, yet somehow likeable, with his extraordinarily\
      cheerful way of blurting out his opinions.\
\
      \'93Come in,\'94 he said; \'93have you had tea?\'94\
\
      Mont came in.\
\
      \'93I thought Fleur would have been back, sir; but I'm glad she\
      isn't. The fact is, I\'97I'm fearfully gone on her; so fearfully\
      gone that I thought you'd better know. It's old-fashioned, of\
      course, coming to fathers first, but I thought you'd forgive\
      that. I went to my own Dad, and he says if I settle down he'll\
      see me through. He rather cottons to the idea, in fact. I told\
      him about your Goya.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 said Soames, inexpressibly dry. \'93He rather cottons?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, sir; do you?\'94\
\
      Soames smiled faintly.\
\
      \'93You see,\'94 resumed Mont, twiddling his straw hat, while his hair,\
      ears, eyebrows, all seemed to stand up from excitement, \'93when\
      you've been through the War you can't help being in a hurry.\'94\
\
      \'93To get married; and unmarried afterward,\'94 said Soames slowly.\
\
      \'93Not from Fleur, sir. Imagine, if you were me!\'94\
\
      Soames cleared his throat. That way of putting it was forcible\
      enough.\
\
      \'93Fleur's too young,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93Oh! no, sir. We're awfully old nowadays. My Dad seems to me a\
      perfect babe; his thinking apparatus hasn't turned a hair. But\
      he's a Baronight, of course; that keeps him back.\'94\
\
      \'93Baronight,\'94 repeated Soames; \'93what may that be?\'94\
\
      \'93Bart, sir. I shall be a Bart some day. But I shall live it down,\
      you know.\'94\
\
      \'93Go away and live this down,\'94 said Soames.\
\
      Young Mont said imploringly: \'93Oh! no, sir. I simply must hang\
      around, or I shouldn't have a dog's chance. You'll let Fleur do\
      what she likes, I suppose, anyway. Madame passes me.\'94\
\
      \'93Indeed!\'94 said Soames frigidly.\
\
      \'93You don't really bar me, do you?\'94 and the young man looked so\
      doleful that Soames smiled.\
\
      \'93You may think you're very old,\'94 he said; \'93but you strike me as\
      extremely young. To rattle ahead of everything is not a proof of\
      maturity.\'94\
\
      \'93All right, sir; I give you our age. But to show you I mean\
      business\'97I've got a job.\'94\
\
      \'93Glad to hear it.\'94\
\
      \'93Joined a publisher; my governor is putting up the stakes.\'94\
\
      Soames put his hand over his mouth\'97he had so very nearly said:\
      \'93God help the publisher!\'94 His grey eyes scrutinised the agitated\
      young man.\
\
      \'93I don't dislike you, Mr. Mont, but Fleur is everything to me:\
      Everything\'97do you understand?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, sir, I know; but so she is to me.\'94\
\
      \'93That's as may be. I'm glad you've told me, however. And now I\
      think there's nothing more to be said.\'94\
\
      \'93I know it rests with her, sir.\'94\
\
      \'93It will rest with her a long time, I hope.\'94\
\
      \'93You aren't cheering,\'94 said Mont suddenly.\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Soames, \'93my experience of life has not made me anxious\
      to couple people in a hurry. Good-night, Mr. Mont. I shan't tell\
      Fleur what you've said.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 murmured Mont blankly; \'93I really could knock my brains out\
      for want of her. She knows that perfectly well.\'94\
\
      \'93I dare say.\'94 And Soames held out his hand. A distracted squeeze,\
      a heavy sigh, and soon after sounds from the young man's\
      motor-cycle called up visions of flying dust and broken bones.\
\
      'The younger generation!' he thought heavily, and went out on to\
      the lawn. The gardeners had been mowing, and there was still the\
      smell of fresh-cut grass\'97the thundery air kept all scents close\
      to earth. The sky was of a purplish hue\'97the poplars black. Two or\
      three boats passed on the river, scuttling, as it were, for\
      shelter before the storm. 'Three days' fine weather,' thought\
      Soames, 'and then a storm!' Where was Annette? With that chap,\
      for all he knew\'97she was a young woman! Impressed with the queer\
      charity of that thought, he entered the summerhouse and sat down.\
      The fact was\'97and he admitted it\'97Fleur was so much to him that his\
      wife was very little\'97very little; French\'97had never been much more\
      than a mistress, and he was getting indifferent to that side of\
      things! It was odd how, with all this ingrained care for\
      moderation and secure investment, Soames ever put his emotional\
      eggs into one basket. First Irene\'97now Fleur. He was dimly\
      conscious of it, sitting there, conscious of its odd\
      dangerousness. It had brought him to wreck and scandal once, but\
      now\'97now it should save him! He cared so much for Fleur that he\
      would have no further scandal. If only he could get at that\
      anonymous letter-writer, he would teach him not to meddle and\
      stir up mud at the bottom of water which he wished should remain\
      stagnant!... A distant flash, a low rumble, and large drops of\
      rain spattered on the thatch above him. He remained indifferent,\
      tracing a pattern with his finger on the dusty surface of a\
      little rustic table. Fleur's future! 'I want fair sailing for\
      her,' he thought. 'Nothing else matters at my time of life.' A\
      lonely business\'97life! What you had you never could keep to\
      yourself! As you warned one off, you let another in. One could\
      make sure of nothing! He reached up and pulled a red rambler rose\
      from a cluster which blocked the window. Flowers grew and\
      dropped\'97Nature was a queer thing! The thunder rumbled and\
      crashed, travelling east along a river, the paling flashes\
      flicked his eyes; the poplar tops showed sharp and dense against\
      the sky, a heavy shower rustled and rattled and veiled in the\
      little house wherein he sat, indifferent, thinking.\
\
      When the storm was over, he left his retreat and went down the\
      wet path to the river bank.\
\
      Two swans had come, sheltering in among the reeds. He knew the\
      birds well, and stood watching the dignity in the curve of those\
      white necks and formidable snake-like heads. 'Not dignified\'97what\
      I have to do!' he thought. And yet it must be tackled, lest worse\
      befell. Annette must be back by now from wherever she had gone,\
      for it was nearly dinner-time, and as the moment for seeing her\
      approached, the difficulty of knowing what to say and how to say\
      it had increased. A new and scaring thought occurred to him.\
      Suppose she wanted her liberty to marry this fellow! Well, if she\
      did, she couldn't have it. He had not married her for that. The\
      image of Prosper Profond dawdled before him reassuringly. Not a\
      marrying man! No, no! Anger replaced that momentary scare. 'He\
      had better not come my way,' he thought. The mongrel\
      represented\'97-! But what did Prosper Profond represent? Nothing\
      that mattered surely. And yet something real enough in the\
      world\'97unmorality let off its chain, disillusionment on the prowl!\
      That expression Annette had caught from him: \'93Je m'en fiche!\'94 A\
      fatalistic chap! A continental\'97a cosmopolitan\'97a product of the\
      age! If there were condemnation more complete, Soames felt that\
      he did not know it.\
\
      The swans had turned their heads, and were looking past him into\
      some distance of their own. One of them uttered a little hiss,\
      wagged its tail, turned as if answering to a rudder, and swam\
      away. The other followed. Their white bodies, their stately\
      necks, passed out of his sight, and he went toward the house.\
\
      Annette was in the drawing-room, dressed for dinner, and he\
      thought as he went up-stairs 'Handsome is as handsome does.'\
      Handsome! Except for remarks about the curtains in the\
      drawing-room, and the storm, there was practically no\
      conversation during a meal distinguished by exactitude of\
      quantity and perfection of quality. Soames drank nothing. He\
      followed her into the drawing-room afterward, and found her\
      smoking a cigarette on the sofa between the two French windows.\
      She was leaning back, almost upright, in a low black frock, with\
      her knees crossed and her blue eyes half-closed; grey-blue smoke\
      issued from her red, rather full lips, a fillet bound her\
      chestnut hair, she wore the thinnest silk stockings, and shoes\
      with very high heels showing off her instep. A fine piece in any\
      room! Soames, who held that torn letter in a hand thrust deep\
      into the side-pocket of his dinner-jacket, said:\
\
      \'93I'm going to shut the window; the damp's lifting in.\'94\
\
      He did so, and stood looking at a David Cox adorning the\
      cream-panelled wall close by.\
\
      What was she thinking of? He had never understood a woman in his\
      life\'97except Fleur\'97and Fleur not always! His heart beat fast. But\
      if he meant to do it, now was the moment. Turning from the David\
      Cox, he took out the torn letter.\
\
      \'93I've had this.\'94\
\
      Her eyes widened, stared at him, and hardened.\
\
      Soames handed her the letter.\
\
      \'93It's torn, but you can read it.\'94 And he turned back to the David\
      Cox\'97a sea-piece, of good tone\'97but without movement enough. 'I\
      wonder what that chap's doing at this moment?' he thought. 'I'll\
      astonish him yet.' Out of the corner of his eye he saw Annette\
      holding the letter rigidly; her eyes moved from side to side\
      under her darkened lashes and frowning darkened eyes. She dropped\
      the letter, gave a little shiver, smiled, and said:\
\
      \'93Dirrty!\'94\
\
      \'93I quite agree,\'94 said Soames; \'93degrading. Is it true?\'94\
\
      A tooth fastened on her red lower lip. \'93And what if it were?\'94\
\
      She was brazen!\
\
      \'93Is that all you have to say?\'94\
\
      \'93No.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, speak out!\'94\
\
      \'93What is the good of talking?\'94\
\
      Soames said icily: \'93So you admit it?\'94\
\
      \'93I admit nothing. You are a fool to ask. A man like you should\
      not ask. It is dangerous.\'94\
\
      Soames made a tour of the room, to subdue his rising anger.\
\
      \'93Do you remember,\'94 he said, halting in front of her, \'93what you\
      were when I married you? Working at accounts in a restaurant.\'94\
\
      \'93Do you remember that I was not half your age?\'94\
\
      Soames broke off the hard encounter of their eyes, and went back\
      to the David Cox.\
\
      \'93I am not going to bandy words. I require you to give up\
      this\'97friendship. I think of the matter entirely as it affects\
      Fleur.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah!\'97Fleur!\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Soames stubbornly; \'93Fleur. She is your child as well\
      as mine.\'94\
\
      \'93It is kind to admit that!\'94\
\
      \'93Are you going to do what I say?\'94\
\
      \'93I refuse to tell you.\'94\
\
      \'93Then I must make you.\'94\
\
      Annette smiled.\
\
      \'93No, Soames,\'94 she said. \'93You are helpless. Do not say things that\
      you will regret.\'94\
\
      Anger swelled the veins on his forehead. He opened his mouth to\
      vent that emotion, and could not. Annette went on:\
\
      \'93There shall be no more such letters, I promise you. That is\
      enough.\'94\
\
      Soames writhed. He had a sense of being treated like a child by\
      this woman who had deserved he did not know what.\
\
      \'93When two people have married, and lived like us, Soames, they\
      had better be quiet about each other. There are things one does\
      not drag up into the light for people to laugh at. You will be\
      quiet, then; not for my sake for your own. You are getting old; I\
      am not, yet. You have made me ver-ry practical\'94\
\
      Soames, who had passed through all the sensations of being\
      choked, repeated dully:\
\
      \'93I require you to give up this friendship.\'94\
\
      \'93And if I do not?\'94\
\
      \'93Then\'97then I will cut you out of my Will.\'94\
\
      Somehow it did not seem to meet the case. Annette laughed.\
\
      \'93You will live a long time, Soames.\'94\
\
      \'93You\'97you are a bad woman,\'94 said Soames suddenly.\
\
      Annette shrugged her shoulders.\
\
      \'93I do not think so. Living with you has killed things in me, it\
      is true; but I am not a bad woman. I am sensible\'97that is all. And\
      so will you be when you have thought it over.\'94\
\
      \'93I shall see this man,\'94 said Soames sullenly, \'93and warn him off.\'94\
\
      \'93Mon cher, you are funny. You do not want me, you have as much of\
      me as you want; and you wish the rest of me to be dead. I admit\
      nothing, but I am not going to be dead, Soames, at my age; so you\
      had better be quiet, I tell you. I myself will make no scandal;\
      none. Now, I am not saying any more, whatever you do.\'94\
\
      She reached out, took a French novel off a little table, and\
      opened it. Soames watched her, silenced by the tumult of his\
      feelings. The thought of that man was almost making him want her,\
      and this was a revelation of their relationship, startling to one\
      little given to introspective philosophy. Without saying another\
      word he went out and up to the picture-gallery. This came of\
      marrying a Frenchwoman! And yet, without her there would have\
      been no Fleur! She had served her purpose.\
\
      'She's right,' he thought; 'I can do nothing. I don't even know\
      that there's anything in it.' The instinct of self-preservation\
      warned him to batten down his hatches, to smother the fire with\
      want of air. Unless one believed there was something in a thing,\
      there wasn't.\
\
      That night he went into her room. She received him in the most\
      matter-of-fact way, as if there had been no scene between them.\
      And he returned to his own room with a curious sense of peace. If\
      one didn't choose to see, one needn't. And he did not choose\'97in\
      future he did not choose. There was nothing to be gained by\
      it\'97nothing! Opening the drawer he took from the sachet a\
      handkerchief, and the framed photograph of Fleur. When he had\
      looked at it a little he slipped it down, and there was that\
      other one\'97that old one of Irene. An owl hooted while he stood in\
      his window gazing at it. The owl hooted, the red climbing roses\
      seemed to deepen in colour, there came a scent of lime-blossom.\
      God! That had been a different thing! Passion\'97Memory! Dust!\
\
\
\
\
      VII.\'97JUNE TAKES A HAND\
\
      One who was a sculptor, a Slav, a sometime resident in New York,\
      an egoist, and impecunious, was to be found of an evening in June\
      Forsyte's studio on the bank of the Thames at Chiswick. On the\
      evening of July 6, Boris Strumolowski\'97several of whose works were\
      on show there because they were as yet too advanced to be on show\
      anywhere else\'97had begun well, with that aloof and rather\
      Christ-like silence which admirably suited his youthful, round,\
      broad cheek-boned countenance framed in bright hair banged like a\
      girl's. June had known him three weeks, and he still seemed to\
      her the principal embodiment of genius, and hope of the future; a\
      sort of Star of the East which had strayed into an unappreciative\
      West. Until that evening he had conversationally confined himself\
      to recording his impressions of the United States, whose dust he\
      had just shaken from off his feet\'97a country, in his opinion, so\
      barbarous in every way that he had sold practically nothing\
      there, and become an object of suspicion to the police; a\
      country, as he said, without a race of its own, without liberty,\
      equality, or fraternity, without principles, traditions, taste,\
      without\'97in a word\'97a soul. He had left it for his own good, and\
      come to the only other country where he could live well. June had\
      dwelt unhappily on him in her lonely moments, standing before his\
      creations\'97frightening, but powerful and symbolic once they had\
      been explained! That he, haloed by bright hair like an early\
      Italian painting, and absorbed in his genius to the exclusion of\
      all else\'97the only sign of course by which real genius could be\
      told\'97should still be a \'93lame duck\'94 agitated her warm heart almost\
      to the exclusion of Paul Post. And she had begun to take steps to\
      clear her Gallery, in order to fill it with Strumolowski\
      masterpieces. She had at once encountered trouble. Paul Post had\
      kicked; Vospovitch had stung. With all the emphasis of a genius\
      which she did not as yet deny them, they had demanded another six\
      weeks at least of her Gallery. The American stream, still flowing\
      in, would soon be flowing out. The American stream was their\
      right, their only hope, their salvation\'97since nobody in this\
      \'93beastly\'94 country cared for Art. June had yielded to the\
      demonstration. After all Boris would not mind their having the\
      full benefit of an American stream, which he himself so violently\
      despised.\
\
      This evening she had put that to Boris with nobody else present,\
      except Hannah Hobdey, the mediaeval black-and-whitist, and Jimmy\
      Portugal, editor of the Neo-Artist. She had put it to him with\
      that sudden confidence which continual contact with the\
      neo-artistic world had never been able to dry up in her warm and\
      generous nature. He had not broken his Christ-like silence,\
      however, for more than two minutes before she began to move her\
      blue eyes from side to side, as a cat moves its tail. This\'97he\
      said\'97was characteristic of England, the most selfish country in\
      the world; the country which sucked the blood of other countries;\
      destroyed the brains and hearts of Irishmen, Hindus, Egyptians,\
      Boers, and Burmese, all the best races in the world; bullying,\
      hypocritical England! This was what he had expected, coming to,\
      such a country, where the climate was all fog, and the people all\
      tradesmen perfectly blind to Art, and sunk in profiteering and\
      the grossest materialism. Conscious that Hannah Hobdey was\
      murmuring, \'93Hear, hear!\'94 and Jimmy Portugal sniggering, June grew\
      crimson, and suddenly rapped out:\
\
      \'93Then why did you ever come? We didn't ask you.\'94\
\
      The remark was so singularly at variance with all she had led him\
      to expect from her, that Strumolowski stretched out his hand and\
      took a cigarette.\
\
      \'93England never wants an idealist,\'94 he said.\
\
      But in June something primitively English was thoroughly upset;\
      old Jolyon's sense of justice had risen, as it were, from bed.\
      \'93You come and sponge on us,\'94 she said, \'93and then abuse us. If you\
      think that's playing the game, I don't.\'94\
\
      She now discovered that which others had discovered before\
      her\'97the thickness of hide beneath which the sensibility of genius\
      is sometimes veiled. Strumolowski's young and ingenuous face\
      became the incarnation of a sneer.\
\
      \'93Sponge, one does not sponge, one takes what is owing\'97a tenth\
      part of what is owing. You will repent to say that, Miss\
      Forsyte.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, no,\'94 said June, \'93I shan't.\'94\
\
      \'93Ah! We know very well, we artists\'97you take us to get what you\
      can out of us. I want nothing from you\'94\'97and he blew out a cloud\
      of June's smoke.\
\
      Decision rose in an icy puff from the turmoil of insulted shame\
      within her. \'93Very well, then, you can take your things away.\'94\
\
      And, almost in the same moment, she thought: 'Poor boy! He's only\
      got a garret, and probably not a taxi fare. In front of these\
      people, too; it's positively disgusting!'\
\
      Young Strumolowski shook his head violently; his hair, thick,\
      smooth, close as a golden plate, did not fall off.\
\
      \'93I can live on nothing,\'94 he said shrilly; \'93I have often had to\
      for the sake of my Art. It is you bourgeois who force us to spend\
      money.\'94\
\
      The words hit June like a pebble, in the ribs. After all she had\
      done for Art, all her identification with its troubles and lame\
      ducks. She was struggling for adequate words when the door was\
      opened, and her Austrian murmured:\
\
      \'93A young lady, gnadiges Fraulein.\'94\
\
      \'93Where?\'94\
\
      \'93In the little meal-room.\'94\
\
      With a glance at Boris Strumolowski, at Hannah Hobdey, at Jimmy\
      Portugal, June said nothing, and went out, devoid of equanimity.\
      Entering the \'93little meal-room,\'94 she perceived the young lady to\
      be Fleur\'97looking very pretty, if pale. At this disenchanted\
      moment a little lame duck of her own breed was welcome to June,\
      so homoeopathic by instinct.\
\
      The girl must have come, of course, because of Jon; or, if not,\
      at least to get something out of her. And June felt just then\
      that to assist somebody was the only bearable thing.\
\
      \'93So you've remembered to come,\'94 she said.\
\
      \'93Yes. What a jolly little duck of a house! But please don't let\
      me bother you, if you've got people.\'94\
\
      \'93Not at all,\'94 said June. \'93I want to let them stew in their own\
      juice for a bit. Have you come about Jon?\'94\
\
      \'93You said you thought we ought to be told. Well, I've found out.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 said June blankly. \'93Not nice, is it?\'94\
\
      They were standing one on each side of the little bare table at\
      which June took her meals. A vase on it was full of Iceland\
      poppies; the girl raised her hand and touched them with a gloved\
      finger. To her new-fangled dress, frilly about the hips and tight\
      below the knees, June took a sudden liking\'97a charming colour,\
      flax-blue.\
\
      'She makes a picture,' thought June. Her little room, with its\
      whitewashed walls, its floor and hearth of old pink brick, its\
      black paint, and latticed window athwart which the last of the\
      sunlight was shining, had never looked so charming, set off by\
      this young figure, with the creamy, slightly frowning face. She\
      remembered with sudden vividness how nice she herself had looked\
      in those old days when her heart was set on Philip Bosinney, that\
      dead lover, who had broken from her to destroy for ever Irene's\
      allegiance to this girl's father. Did Fleur know of that, too?\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 she said, \'93what are you going to do?\'94\
\
      It was some seconds before Fleur answered.\
\
      \'93I don't want Jon to suffer. I must see him once more to put an\
      end to it.\'94\
\
      \'93You're going to put an end to it!\'94\
\
      \'93What else is there to do?\'94\
\
      The girl seemed to June, suddenly, intolerably spiritless.\
\
      \'93I suppose you're right,\'94 she muttered. \'93I know my father thinks\
      so; but\'97I should never have done it myself. I can't take things\
      lying down.\'94\
\
      How poised and watchful that girl looked; how unemotional her\
      voice sounded!\
\
      \'93People will assume that I'm in love.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, aren't you?\'94\
\
      Fleur shrugged her shoulders. 'I might have known it,' thought\
      June; 'she's Soames' daughter\'97fish! And yet\'97he!'\
\
      \'93What do you want me to do then?\'94 she said with a sort of\
      disgust.\
\
      \'93Could I see Jon here to-morrow on his way down to Holly's? He'd\
      come if you sent him a line to-night. And perhaps afterward you'd\
      let them know quietly at Robin Hill that it's all over, and that\
      they needn't tell Jon about his mother.\'94\
\
      \'93All right!\'94 said June abruptly. \'93I'll write now, and you can\
      post it. Half-past two tomorrow. I shan't be in, myself.\'94\
\
      She sat down at the tiny bureau which filled one corner. When she\
      looked round with the finished note Fleur was still touching the\
      poppies with her gloved finger.\
\
      June licked a stamp. \'93Well, here it is. If you're not in love, of\
      course, there's no more to be said. Jon's lucky.\'94\
\
      Fleur took the note. \'93Thanks awfully!\'94\
\
      'Cold-blooded little baggage!' thought June. Jon, son of her\
      father, to love, and not to be loved by the daughter of\'97Soames!\
      It was humiliating!\
\
      \'93Is that all?\'94\
\
      Fleur nodded; her frills shook and trembled as she swayed toward\
      the door.\
\
      \'93Good-bye!\'94\
\
      \'93Good-bye!... Little piece of fashion!\'94 muttered June, closing\
      the door. \'93That family!\'94 And she marched back toward her studio.\
      Boris Strumolowski had regained his Christ-like silence and Jimmy\
      Portugal was damning everybody, except the group in whose behalf\
      he ran the Neo-Artist. Among the condemned were Eric Cobbley, and\
      several other \'93lame-duck\'94 genii who at one time or another had\
      held first place in the repertoire of June's aid and adoration.\
      She experienced a sense of futility and disgust, and went to the\
      window to let the river-wind blow those squeaky words away.\
\
      But when at length Jimmy Portugal had finished, and gone with\
      Hannah Hobdey, she sat down and mothered young Strumolowski for\
      half an hour, promising him a month, at least, of the American\
      stream; so that he went away with his halo in perfect order. 'In\
      spite of all,' June thought, 'Boris is wonderful.'\
\
\
\
\
      VIII.\'97THE BIT BETWEEN THE TEETH\
\
      To know that your hand is against every one's is\'97for some\
      natures\'97to experience a sense of moral release. Fleur felt no\
      remorse when she left June's house. Reading condemnatory\
      resentment in her little kinswoman's blue eyes-she was glad that\
      she had fooled her, despising June because that elderly idealist\
      had not seen what she was after.\
\
      End it, forsooth! She would soon show them all that she was only\
      just beginning. And she smiled to herself on the top of the bus\
      which carried her back to Mayfair. But the smile died, squeezed\
      out by spasms of anticipation and anxiety. Would she be able to\
      manage Jon? She had taken the bit between her teeth, but could\
      she make him take it too? She knew the truth and the real danger\
      of delay\'97he knew neither; therein lay all the difference in the\
      world.\
\
      'Suppose I tell him,' she thought; 'wouldn't it really be safer?'\
      This hideous luck had no right to spoil their love; he must see\
      that! They could not let it! People always accepted an\
      accomplished fact in time! From that piece of philosophy\'97profound\
      enough at her age\'97she passed to another consideration less\
      philosophic. If she persuaded Jon to a quick and secret marriage,\
      and he found out afterward that she had known the truth. What\
      then? Jon hated subterfuge. Again, then, would it not be better\
      to tell him? But the memory of his mother's face kept intruding\
      on that impulse. Fleur was afraid. His mother had power over him;\
      more power perhaps than she herself. Who could tell? It was too\
      great a risk. Deep-sunk in these instinctive calculations she was\
      carried on past Green Street as far as the Ritz Hotel. She got\
      down there, and walked back on the Green Park side. The storm had\
      washed every tree; they still dripped. Heavy drops fell on to her\
      frills, and to avoid them she crossed over under the eyes of the\
      Iseeum Club. Chancing to look up she saw Monsieur Profond with a\
      tall stout man in the bay window. Turning into Green Street she\
      heard her name called, and saw \'93that prowler\'94 coming up. He took\
      off his hat\'97a glossy \'93bowler\'94 such as she particularly detested.\
\
      \'93Good evenin'. Miss Forsyde. Isn't there a small thing I can do\
      for you?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, pass by on the other side.\'94\
\
      \'93I say! Why do you dislike me?\'94\
\
      \'93Do I?\'94\
\
      \'93It looks like it.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, then, because you make me feel life isn't worth living.\'94\
\
      Monsieur Profond smiled.\
\
      \'93Look here, Miss Forsyde, don't worry. It'll be all right.\
      Nothing lasts.\'94\
\
      \'93Things do last,\'94 cried Fleur; \'93with me anyhow\'97especially likes\
      and dislikes.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, that makes me a bit un'appy.\'94\
\
      \'93I should have thought nothing could ever make you happy or\
      unhappy.\'94\
\
      \'93I don't like to annoy other people. I'm goin' on my yacht.\'94\
\
      Fleur looked at him, startled.\
\
      \'93Where?\'94\
\
      \'93Small voyage to the South Seas or somewhere,\'94 said Monsieur\
      Profond.\
\
      Fleur suffered relief and a sense of insult. Clearly he meant to\
      convey that he was breaking with her mother. How dared he have\
      anything to break, and yet how dared he break it?\
\
      \'93Good-night, Miss Forsyde! Remember me to Mrs. Dartie. I'm not so\
      bad really. Good-night!\'94 Fleur left him standing there with his\
      hat raised. Stealing a look round, she saw him stroll\'97immaculate\
      and heavy\'97back toward his Club.\
\
      'He can't even love with conviction,' she thought. 'What will\
      Mother do?'\
\
      Her dreams that night were endless and uneasy; she rose heavy and\
      unrested, and went at once to the study of Whitaker's Almanac. A\
      Forsyte is instinctively aware that facts are the real crux of\
      any situation. She might conquer Jon's prejudice, but without\
      exact machinery to complete their desperate resolve, nothing\
      would happen. From the invaluable tome she learned that they must\
      each be twenty-one; or some one's consent would be necessary,\
      which of course was unobtainable; then she became lost in\
      directions concerning licenses, certificates, notices, districts,\
      coming finally to the word \'93perjury.\'94 But that was nonsense! Who\
      would really mind their giving wrong ages in order to be married\
      for love! She ate hardly any breakfast, and went back to\
      Whitaker. The more she studied the less sure she became; till,\
      idly turning the pages, she came to Scotland. People could be\
      married there without any of this nonsense. She had only to go\
      and stay there twenty-one days, then Jon could come, and in front\
      of two people they could declare themselves married. And what was\
      more\'97they would be! It was far the best way; and at once she ran\
      over her schoolfellows. There was Mary Lambe who lived in\
      Edinburgh and was \'93quite a sport!\'94\
\
      She had a brother too. She could stay with Mary Lambe, who with\
      her brother would serve for witnesses. She well knew that some\
      girls would think all this unnecessary, and that all she and Jon\
      need do was to go away together for a weekend and then say to\
      their people: \'93We are married by Nature, we must now be married\
      by Law.\'94 But Fleur was Forsyte enough to feel such a proceeding\
      dubious, and to dread her father's face when he heard of it.\
      Besides, she did not believe that Jon would do it; he had an\
      opinion of her such as she could not bear to diminish. No! Mary\
      Lambe was preferable, and it was just the time of year to go to\
      Scotland. More at ease now she packed, avoided her aunt, and took\
      a bus to Chiswick. She was too early, and went on to Kew Gardens.\
      She found no peace among its flower-beds, labelled trees, and\
      broad green spaces, and having lunched off anchovy-paste\
      sandwiches and coffee, returned to Chiswick and rang June's bell.\
      The Austrian admitted her to the \'93little meal-room.\'94 Now that she\
      knew what she and Jon were up against, her longing for him had\
      increased tenfold, as if he were a toy with sharp edges or\
      dangerous paint such as they had tried to take from her as a\
      child. If she could not have her way, and get Jon for good and\
      all, she felt like dying of privation. By hook or crook she must\
      and would get him! A round dim mirror of very old glass hung over\
      the pink brick hearth. She stood looking at herself reflected in\
      it, pale, and rather dark under the eyes; little shudders kept\
      passing through her nerves. Then she heard the bell ring, and,\
      stealing to the window, saw him standing on the doorstep\
      smoothing his hair and lips, as if he too were trying to subdue\
      the fluttering of his nerves.\
\
      She was sitting on one of the two rush-seated chairs, with her\
      back to the door, when he came in, and she said at once\'97\
\
      \'93Sit down, Jon, I want to talk seriously.\'94\
\
      Jon sat on the table by her side, and without looking at him she\
      went on:\
\
      \'93If you don't want to lose me, we must get married.\'94\
\
      Jon gasped.\
\
      \'93Why? Is there anything new?\'94\
\
      \'93No, but I felt it at Robin Hill, and among my people.\'94\
\
      \'93But\'97\'94 stammered Jon, \'93at Robin Hill\'97it was all smooth\'97and\
      they've said nothing to me.\'94\
\
      \'93But they mean to stop us. Your mother's face was enough. And my\
      father's.\'94\
\
      \'93Have you seen him since?\'94\
\
      Fleur nodded. What mattered a few supplementary lies?\
\
      \'93But,\'94 said Jon eagerly, \'93I can't see how they can feel like that\
      after all these years.\'94\
\
      Fleur looked up at him.\
\
      \'93Perhaps you don't love me enough.\'94 \'93Not love you enough! Why\'97!\'94\
\
      \'93Then make sure of me.\'94\
\
      \'93Without telling them?\'94\
\
      \'93Not till after.\'94\
\
      Jon was silent. How much older he looked than on that day, barely\
      two months ago, when she first saw him\'97quite two years older!\
\
      \'93It would hurt Mother awfully,\'94 he said.\
\
      Fleur drew her hand away.\
\
      \'93You've got to choose.\'94\
\
      Jon slid off the table on to his knees.\
\
      \'93But why not tell them? They can't really stop us, Fleur!\'94\
\
      \'93They can! I tell you, they can.\'94\
\
      \'93How?\'94\
\
      \'93We're utterly dependent\'97by putting money pressure, and all sorts\
      of other pressure. I'm not patient, Jon.\'94\
\
      \'93But it's deceiving them.\'94\
\
      Fleur got up.\
\
      \'93You can't really love me, or you wouldn't hesitate. 'He either\
      fears his fate too much!'\'94\
\
      Lifting his hands to her waist, Jon forced her to sit down again.\
      She hurried on:\
\
      \'93I've planned it all out. We've only to go to Scotland. When\
      we're married they'll soon come round. People always come round\
      to facts. Don't you see, Jon?\'94\
\
      \'93But to hurt them so awfully!\'94\
\
      So he would rather hurt her than those people of his! \'93All right,\
      then; let me go!\'94\
\
      Jon got up and put his back against the door.\
\
      \'93I expect you're right,\'94 he said slowly; \'93but I want to think it\
      over.\'94\
\
      She could see that he was seething with feelings he wanted to\
      express; but she did not mean to help him. She hated herself at\
      this moment and almost hated him. Why had she to do all the work\
      to secure their love? It wasn't fair. And then she saw his eyes,\
      adoring and distressed.\
\
      \'93Don't look like that! I only don't want to lose you, Jon.\'94\
\
      \'93You can't lose me so long as you want me.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, yes, I can.\'94\
\
      Jon put his hands on her shoulders.\
\
      \'93Fleur, do you know anything you haven't told me?\'94\
\
      It was the point-blank question she had dreaded. She looked\
      straight at him, and answered: \'93No.\'94 She had burnt her boats; but\
      what did it matter, if she got him? He would forgive her. And\
      throwing her arms round his neck, she kissed him on the lips. She\
      was winning! She felt it in the beating of his heart against her,\
      in the closing of his eyes. \'93I want to make sure! I want to make\
      sure!\'94 she whispered. \'93Promise!\'94\
\
      Jon did not answer. His face had the stillness of extreme\
      trouble. At last he said:\
\
      \'93It's like hitting them. I must think a little, Fleur. I really\
      must.\'94\
\
      Fleur slipped out of his arms.\
\
      \'93Oh! Very well!\'94 And suddenly she burst into tears of\
      disappointment, shame, and overstrain. Followed five minutes of\
      acute misery. Jon's remorse and tenderness knew no bounds; but he\
      did not promise. Despite her will to cry, \'93Very well, then, if\
      you don't love me enough-goodbye!\'94 she dared not. From birth\
      accustomed to her own way, this check from one so young, so\
      tender, so devoted, baffled and surprised her. She wanted to push\
      him away from her, to try what anger and coldness would do, and\
      again she dared not. The knowledge that she was scheming to rush\
      him blindfold into the irrevocable weakened everything\'97weakened\
      the sincerity of pique, and the sincerity of passion; even her\
      kisses had not the lure she wished for them. That stormy little\
      meeting ended inconclusively.\
\
      \'93Will you some tea, gnadiges Fraulein?\'94\
\
      Pushing Jon from her, she cried out:\
\
      \'93No-no, thank you! I'm just going.\'94\
\
      And before he could prevent her she was gone.\
\
      She went stealthily, mopping her gushed, stained cheeks,\
      frightened, angry, very miserable. She had stirred Jon up so\
      fearfully, yet nothing definite was promised or arranged! But the\
      more uncertain and hazardous the future, the more \'93the will to\
      have\'94 worked its tentacles into the flesh of her heart\'97like some\
      burrowing tick!\
\
      No one was at Green Street. Winifred had gone with Imogen to see\
      a play which some said was allegorical, and others \'93very\
      exciting, don't you know.\'94 It was because of what others said\
      that Winifred and Imogen had gone. Fleur went on to Paddington.\
      Through the carriage the air from the brick-kilns of West Drayton\
      and the late hayfields fanned her still gushed cheeks. Flowers\
      had seemed to be had for the picking; now they were all thorned\
      and prickled. But the golden flower within the crown of spikes\
      seemed to her tenacious spirit all the fairer and more desirable.\
\
\
\
\
      IX.\'97THE FAT IN THE FIRE\
\
      On reaching home Fleur found an atmosphere so peculiar that it\
      penetrated even the perplexed aura of her own private life. Her\
      mother was inaccessibly entrenched in a brown study; her father\
      contemplating fate in the vinery. Neither of them had a word to\
      throw to a dog. 'Is it because of me?' thought Fleur. 'Or because\
      of Profond?' To her mother she said:\
\
      \'93What's the matter with Father?\'94\
\
      Her mother answered with a shrug of her shoulders.\
\
      To her father:\
\
      \'93What's the matter with Mother?\'94\
\
      Her father answered:\
\
      \'93Matter? What should be the matter?\'94 and gave her a sharp look.\
\
      \'93By the way,\'94 murmured Fleur, \'93Monsieur Profond is going a\
      'small' voyage on his yacht, to the South Seas.\'94\
\
      Soames examined a branch on which no grapes were growing.\
\
      \'93This vine's a failure,\'94 he said. \'93I've had young Mont here. He\
      asked me something about you.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! How do you like him, Father?\'94\
\
      \'93He\'97he's a product\'97like all these young people.\'94\
\
      \'93What were you at his age, dear?\'94\
\
      Soames smiled grimly.\
\
      \'93We went to work, and didn't play about\'97flying and motoring, and\
      making love.\'94\
\
      \'93Didn't you ever make love?\'94\
\
      She avoided looking at him while she said that, but she saw him\
      well enough. His pale face had reddened, his eyebrows, where\
      darkness was still mingled with the grey, had come close\
      together.\
\
      \'93I had no time or inclination to philander.\'94\
\
      \'93Perhaps you had a grand passion.\'94\
\
      Soames looked at her intently.\
\
      \'93Yes\'97if you want to know\'97and much good it did me.\'94 He moved away,\
      along by the hot-water pipes. Fleur tiptoed silently after him.\
\
      \'93Tell me about it, Father!\'94\
\
      Soames became very still.\
\
      \'93What should you want to know about such things, at your age?\'94\
\
      \'93Is she alive?\'94\
\
      He nodded.\
\
      \'93And married?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      \'93It's Jon Forsyte's mother, isn't it? And she was your wife\
      first.\'94\
\
      It was said in a flash of intuition. Surely his opposition came\
      from his anxiety that she should not know of that old wound to\
      his pride. But she was startled. To see some one so old and calm\
      wince as if struck, to hear so sharp a note of pain in his voice!\
\
      \'93Who told you that? If your aunt! I can't bear the affair talked\
      of.\'94\
\
      \'93But, darling,\'94 said Fleur, softly, \'93it's so long ago.\'94\
\
      \'93Long ago or not, I....\'94\
\
      Fleur stood stroking his arm.\
\
      \'93I've tried to forget,\'94 he said suddenly; \'93I don't wish to be\
      reminded.\'94 And then, as if venting some long and secret\
      irritation, he added: \'93In these days people don't understand.\
      Grand passion, indeed! No one knows what it is.\'94\
\
      \'93I do,\'94 said Fleur, almost in a whisper.\
\
      Soames, who had turned his back on her, spun round.\
\
      \'93What are you talking of\'97a child like you!\'94\
\
      \'93Perhaps I've inherited it, Father.\'94\
\
      \'93What?\'94\
\
      \'93For her son, you see.\'94\
\
      He was pale as a sheet, and she knew that she was as bad. They\
      stood staring at each other in the steamy heat, redolent of the\
      mushy scent of earth, of potted geranium, and of vines coming\
      along fast.\
\
      \'93This is crazy,\'94 said Soames at last, between dry lips.\
\
      Scarcely moving her own, she murmured:\
\
      \'93Don't be angry, Father. I can't help it.\'94\
\
      But she could see he wasn't angry; only scared, deeply scared.\
\
      \'93I thought that foolishness,\'94 he stammered, \'93was all forgotten.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, no! It's ten times what it was.\'94\
\
      Soames kicked at the hot-water pipe. The hapless movement touched\
      her, who had no fear of her father\'97none.\
\
      \'93Dearest!\'94 she said. \'93What must be, must, you know.\'94\
\
      \'93Must!\'94 repeated Soames. \'93You don't know what you're talking of.\
      Has that boy been told?\'94\
\
      The blood rushed into her cheeks.\
\
      \'93Not yet.\'94\
\
      He had turned from her again, and, with one shoulder a little\
      raised, stood staring fixedly at a joint in the pipes.\
\
      \'93It's most distasteful to me,\'94 he said suddenly; \'93nothing could\
      be more so. Son of that fellow! It's\'97it's\'97perverse!\'94\
\
      She had noted, almost unconsciously, that he did not say \'93son of\
      that woman,\'94 and again her intuition began working.\
\
      Did the ghost of that grand passion linger in some corner of his\
      heart?\
\
      She slipped her hand under his arm.\
\
      \'93Jon's father is quite ill and old; I saw him.\'94\
\
      \'93You\'97?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, I went there with Jon; I saw them both.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, and what did they say to you?\'94\
\
      \'93Nothing. They were very polite.\'94\
\
      \'93They would be.\'94 He resumed his contemplation of the pipe-joint,\
      and then said suddenly:\
\
      \'93I must think this over\'97I'll speak to you again to-night.\'94\
\
      She knew this was final for the moment, and stole away, leaving\
      him still looking at the pipe-joint. She wandered into the\
      fruit-garden, among the raspberry and currant bushes, without\
      impetus to pick and eat. Two months ago\'97she was light-hearted!\
      Even two days ago\'97light-hearted, before Prosper Profond told her.\
      Now she felt tangled in a web-of passions, vested rights,\
      oppressions and revolts, the ties of love and hate. At this dark\
      moment of discouragement there seemed, even to her hold-fast\
      nature, no way out. How deal with it\'97how sway and bend things to\
      her will, and get her heart's desire? And, suddenly, round the\
      corner of the high box hedge, she came plump on her mother,\
      walking swiftly, with an open letter in her hand. Her bosom was\
      heaving, her eyes dilated, her cheeks flushed. Instantly Fleur\
      thought: 'The yacht! Poor Mother!'\
\
      Annette gave her a wide startled look, and said:\
\
      \'93J'ai la migraine.\'94\
\
      \'93I'm awfully sorry, Mother.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, yes! you and your father\'97sorry!\'94\
\
      \'93But, Mother\'97I am. I know what it feels like.\'94\
\
      Annette's startled eyes grew wide, till the whites showed above\
      them.\
\
      \'93Poor innocent!\'94 she said.\
\
      Her mother\'97so self-possessed, and commonsensical\'97to look and\
      speak like this! It was all frightening! Her father, her mother,\
      herself! And only two months back they had seemed to have\
      everything they wanted in this world.\
\
      Annette crumpled the letter in her hand. Fleur knew that she must\
      ignore the sight.\
\
      \'93Can't I do anything for your head, Mother?\'94\
\
      Annette shook that head and walked on, swaying her hips.\
\
      'It's cruel,' thought Fleur, 'and I was glad! That man! What do\
      men come prowling for, disturbing everything! I suppose he's\
      tired of her. What business has he to be tired of my mother? What\
      business!' And at that thought, so natural and so peculiar, she\
      uttered a little choked laugh.\
\
      She ought, of course, to be delighted, but what was there to be\
      delighted at? Her father didn't really care! Her mother did,\
      perhaps? She entered the orchard, and sat down under a\
      cherry-tree. A breeze sighed in the higher boughs; the sky seen\
      through their green was very blue and very white in cloud\'97those\
      heavy white clouds almost always present in river landscape.\
      Bees, sheltering out of the wind, hummed softly, and over the\
      lush grass fell the thick shade from those fruit-trees planted by\
      her father five-and-twenty, years ago. Birds were almost silent,\
      the cuckoos had ceased to sing, but wood-pigeons were cooing. The\
      breath and drone and cooing of high summer were not for long a\
      sedative to her excited nerves. Crouched over her knees she began\
      to scheme. Her father must be made to back her up. Why should he\
      mind so long as she was happy? She had not lived for nearly\
      nineteen years without knowing that her future was all he really\
      cared about. She had, then, only to convince him that her future\
      could not be happy without Jon. He thought it a mad fancy. How\
      foolish the old were, thinking they could tell what the young\
      felt! Had not he confessed that he\'97when young\'97had loved with a\
      grand passion? He ought to understand! 'He piles up his money for\
      me,' she thought; 'but what's the use, if I'm not going to be\
      happy?' Money, and all it bought, did not bring happiness. Love\
      only brought that. The ox-eyed daisies in this orchard, which\
      gave it such a moony look sometimes, grew wild and happy, and had\
      their hour. 'They oughtn't to have called me Fleur,' she mused,\
      'if they didn't mean me to have my hour, and be happy while it\
      lasts.' Nothing real stood in the way, like poverty, or\
      disease\'97sentiment only, a ghost from the unhappy past! Jon was\
      right. They wouldn't let you live, these old people! They made\
      mistakes, committed crimes, and wanted their children to go on\
      paying! The breeze died away; midges began to bite. She got up,\
      plucked a piece of honeysuckle, and went in.\
\
      It was hot that night. Both she and her mother had put on thin,\
      pale low frocks. The dinner flowers were pale. Fleur was struck\
      with the pale look of everything; her father's face, her mother's\
      shoulders; the pale panelled walls, the pale grey velvety carpet,\
      the lamp-shade, even the soup was pale. There was not one spot of\
      colour in the room, not even wine in the pale glasses, for no one\
      drank it. What was not pale was black\'97her father's clothes, the\
      butler's clothes, her retriever stretched out exhausted in the\
      window, the curtains black with a cream pattern. A moth came in,\
      and that was pale. And silent was that half-mourning dinner in\
      the heat.\
\
      Her father called her back as she was following her mother out.\
\
      She sat down beside him at the table, and, unpinning the pale\
      honeysuckle, put it to her nose.\
\
      \'93I've been thinking,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93Yes, dear?\'94\
\
      \'93It's extremely painful for me to talk, but there's no help for\
      it. I don't know if you understand how much you are to me I've\
      never spoken of it, I didn't think it necessary; but\'97but you're\
      everything. Your mother\'97\'94 he paused, staring at his finger-bowl\
      of Venetian glass.\
\
      \'93Yes?\'94'\
\
      \'93I've only you to look to. I've never had\'97never wanted anything\
      else, since you were born.\'94\
\
      \'93I know,\'94 Fleur murmured.\
\
      Soames moistened his lips.\
\
      \'93You may think this a matter I can smooth over and arrange for\
      you. You're mistaken. I'm helpless.\'94\
\
      Fleur did not speak.\
\
      \'93Quite apart from my own feelings,\'94 went on Soames with more\
      resolution, \'93those two are not amenable to anything I can say.\
      They\'97they hate me, as people always hate those whom they have\
      injured.\'94 \'93But he\'97Jon\'97\'94\
\
      \'93He's their flesh and blood, her only child. Probably he means to\
      her what you mean to me. It's a deadlock.\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 cried Fleur, \'93no, Father!\'94\
\
      Soames leaned back, the image of pale patience, as if resolved on\
      the betrayal of no emotion.\
\
      \'93Listen!\'94 he said. \'93You're putting the feelings of two months\'97two\
      months\'97against the feelings of thirty-five years! What chance do\
      you think you have? Two months\'97your very first love affair, a\
      matter of half a dozen meetings, a few walks and talks, a few\
      kisses\'97against, against what you can't imagine, what no one could\
      who hasn't been through it. Come, be reasonable, Fleur! It's\
      midsummer madness!\'94\
\
      Fleur tore the honeysuckle into little, slow bits.\
\
      \'93The madness is in letting the past spoil it all.\
\
      \'93What do we care about the past? It's our lives, not yours.\'94\
\
      Soames raised his hand to his forehead, where suddenly she saw\
      moisture shining.\
\
      \'93Whose child are you?\'94 he said. \'93Whose child is he? The present\
      is linked with the past, the future with both. There's no getting\
      away from that.\'94\
\
      She had never heard philosophy pass those lips before. Impressed\
      even in her agitation, she leaned her elbows on the table, her\
      chin on her hands.\
\
      \'93But, Father, consider it practically. We want each other.\
      There's ever so much money, and nothing whatever in the way but\
      sentiment. Let's bury the past, Father.\'94\
\
      His answer was a sigh.\
\
      \'93Besides,\'94 said Fleur gently, \'93you can't prevent us.\'94\
\
      \'93I don't suppose,\'94 said Soames, \'93that if left to myself I should\
      try to prevent you; I must put up with things, I know, to keep\
      your affection. But it's not I who control this matter. That's\
      what I want you to realise before it's too late. If you go on\
      thinking you can get your way and encourage this feeling, the\
      blow will be much heavier when you find you can't.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 cried Fleur, \'93help me, Father; you can help me, you know.\'94\
\
      Soames made a startled movement of negation. \'93I?\'94 he said\
      bitterly. \'93Help? I am the impediment\'97the just cause and\
      impediment\'97isn't that the jargon? You have my blood in your\
      veins.\'94\
\
      He rose.\
\
      \'93Well, the fat's in the fire. If you persist in your wilfulness\
      you'll have yourself to blame. Come! Don't be foolish, my\
      child\'97my only child!\'94\
\
      Fleur laid her forehead against his shoulder.\
\
      All was in such turmoil within her. But no good to show it! No\
      good at all! She broke away from him, and went out into the\
      twilight, distraught, but unconvinced. All was indeterminate and\
      vague within her, like the shapes and shadows in the garden,\
      except\'97her will to have. A poplar pierced up into the dark-blue\
      sky and touched a white star there. The dew wetted her shoes, and\
      chilled her bare shoulders. She went down to the river bank, and\
      stood gazing at a moonstreak on the darkening water. Suddenly she\
      smelled tobacco smoke, and a white figure emerged as if created\
      by the moon. It was young Mont in flannels, standing in his boat.\
      She heard the tiny hiss of his cigarette extinguished in the\
      water.\
\
      \'93Fleur,\'94 came his voice, \'93don't be hard on a poor devil! I've\
      been waiting hours.\'94\
\
      \'93For what?\'94\
\
      \'93Come in my boat!\'94\
\
      \'93Not I.\'94\
\
      \'93Why not?\'94\
\
      \'93I'm not a water-nymph.\'94\
\
      \'93Haven't you any romance in you? Don't be modern, Fleur!\'94\
\
      He appeared on the path within a yard of her.\
\
      \'93Go away!\'94\
\
      \'93Fleur, I love you. Fleur!\'94\
\
      Fleur uttered a short laugh.\
\
      \'93Come again,\'94 she said, \'93when I haven't got my wish.\'94\
\
      \'93What is your wish?\'94\
\
      \'93Ask another.\'94\
\
      \'93Fleur,\'94 said Mont, and his voice sounded strange, \'93don't mock\
      me! Even vivisected dogs are worth decent treatment before\
      they're cut up for good.\'94\
\
      Fleur shook her head; but her lips were trembling.\
\
      \'93Well, you shouldn't make me jump. Give me a cigarette.\'94\
\
      Mont gave her one, lighted it, and another for himself.\
\
      \'93I don't want to talk rot,\'94 he said, \'93but please imagine all the\
      rot that all the lovers that ever were have talked, and all my\
      special rot thrown in.\'94\
\
      \'93Thank you, I have imagined it. Good-night!\'94 They stood for a\
      moment facing each other in the shadow of an acacia-tree with\
      very moonlit blossoms, and the smoke from their cigarettes\
      mingled in the air between them.\
\
      \'93Also ran: 'Michael Mont'.\'94 he said. Fleur turned abruptly toward\
      the house. On the lawn she stopped to look back. Michael Mont was\
      whirling his arms above him; she could see them dashing at his\
      head; then waving at the moonlit blossoms of the acacia. His\
      voice just reached her. \'93Jolly-jolly!\'94 Fleur shook herself. She\
      couldn't help him, she had too much trouble of her own! On the\
      verandah she stopped very suddenly again. Her mother was sitting\
      in the drawing-room at her writing bureau, quite alone. There was\
      nothing remarkable in the expression of her face except its utter\
      immobility. But she looked desolate! Fleur went upstairs. At the\
      door of her room she paused. She could hear her father walking up\
      and down, up and down the picture-gallery.\
\
      'Yes,' she thought, jolly! Oh, Jon!'\
\
\
\
\
      X.\'97DECISION\
\
      When Fleur left him Jon stared at the Austrian. She was a thin\
      woman with a dark face and the concerned expression of one who\
      has watched every little good that life once had slip from her,\
      one by one. \'93No tea?\'94 she said.\
\
      Susceptible to the disappointment in her voice, Jon murmured:\
\
      \'93No, really; thanks.\'94\
\
      \'93A lil cup\'97it ready. A lil cup and cigarette.\'94\
\
      Fleur was gone! Hours of remorse and indecision lay before him!\
      And with a heavy sense of disproportion he smiled, and said:\
\
      \'93Well\'97thank you!\'94\
\
      She brought in a little pot of tea with two little cups, and a\
      silver box of cigarettes on a little tray.\
\
      \'93Sugar? Miss Forsyte has much sugar\'97she buy my sugar, my friend's\
      sugar also. Miss Forsyte is a veree kind lady. I am happy to\
      serve her. You her brother?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Jon, beginning to puff the second cigarette of his\
      life.\
\
      \'93Very young brother,\'94 said the Austrian, with a little anxious\
      smile, which reminded him of the wag of a dog's tail.\
\
      \'93May I give you some?\'94 he said. \'93And won't you sit down, please?\'94\
\
      The Austrian shook her head.\
\
      \'93Your father a very nice old man\'97the most nice old man I ever\
      see. Miss Forsyte tell me all about him. Is he better?\'94\
\
      Her words fell on Jon like a reproach. \'93Oh Yes, I think he's all\
      right.\'94\
\
      \'93I like to see him again,\'94 said the Austrian, putting a hand on\
      her heart; \'93he have veree kind heart.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Jon. And again her words seemed to him a reproach.\
\
      \'93He never give no trouble to no one, and smile so gentle.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, doesn't he?\'94\
\
      \'93He look at Miss Forsyte so funny sometimes. I tell him all my\
      story; he so sympatisch. Your mother\'97she nice and well?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, very.\'94\
\
      \'93He have her photograph on his dressing-table. Veree beautiful\'94\
\
      Jon gulped down his tea. This woman, with her concerned face and\
      her reminding words, was like the first and second murderers.\
\
      \'93Thank you,\'94 he said; \'93I must go now. May\'97may I leave this with\
      you?\'94\
\
      He put a ten-shilling note on the tray with a doubting hand and\
      gained the door. He heard the Austrian gasp, and hurried out. He\
      had just time to catch his train, and all the way to Victoria\
      looked at every face that passed, as lovers will, hoping against\
      hope. On reaching Worthing he put his luggage into the local\
      train, and set out across the Downs for Wansdon, trying to walk\
      off his aching irresolution. So long as he went full bat, he\
      could enjoy the beauty of those green slopes, stopping now and\
      again to sprawl on the grass, admire the perfection of a wild\
      rose or listen to a lark's song. But the war of motives within\
      him was but postponed\'97the longing for Fleur, and the hatred of\
      deception. He came to the old chalk-pit above Wansdon with his\
      mind no more made up than when he started. To see both sides of a\
      question vigorously was at once Jon's strength and weakness. He\
      tramped in, just as the first dinner-bell rang. His things had\
      already been brought up. He had a hurried bath and came down to\
      find Holly alone\'97Val had gone to Town and would not be back till\
      the last train.\
\
      Since Val's advice to him to ask his sister what was the matter\
      between the two families, so much had happened\'97Fleur's disclosure\
      in the Green Park, her visit to Robin Hill, to-day's meeting\'97that\
      there seemed nothing to ask. He talked of Spain, his sunstroke,\
      Val's horses, their father's health. Holly startled him by saying\
      that she thought their father not at all well. She had been twice\
      to Robin Hill for the week-end. He had seemed fearfully languid,\
      sometimes even in pain, but had always refused to talk about\
      himself.\
\
      \'93He's awfully dear and unselfish\'97don't you think, Jon?\'94\
\
      Feeling far from dear and unselfish himself, Jon answered:\
      \'93Rather!\'94\
\
      \'93I think, he's been a simply perfect father, so long as I can\
      remember.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 answered Jon, very subdued.\
\
      \'93He's never interfered, and he's always seemed to understand. I\
      shall never forget his letting me go to South Africa in the Boer\
      War when I was in love with Val.\'94\
\
      \'93That was before he married Mother, wasn't it?\'94 said Jon\
      suddenly.\
\
      \'93Yes. Why?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! nothing. Only, wasn't she engaged to Fleur's father first?\'94\
\
      Holly put down the spoon she was using, and raised her eyes. Her\
      stare was circumspect. What did the boy know? Enough to make it\
      better to tell him? She could not decide. He looked strained and\
      worried, altogether older, but that might be the sunstroke.\
\
      \'93There was something,\'94 she said. \'93Of course we were out there,\
      and got no news of anything.\'94 She could not take the risk.\
\
      It was not her secret. Besides, she was in the dark about his\
      feelings now. Before Spain she had made sure he was in love; but\
      boys were boys; that was seven weeks ago, and all Spain between.\
\
      She saw that he knew she was putting him off, and added:\
\
      \'93Have you heard anything of Fleur?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      His face told her, then, more than the most elaborate\
      explanations. So he had not forgotten!\
\
      She said very quietly: \'93Fleur is awfully attractive, Jon, but you\
      know\'97Val and I don't really like her very much.\'94\
\
      \'93Why?\'94\
\
      \'93We think she's got rather a 'having' nature.\'94\
\
      \'93'Having'. I don't know what you mean. She\'97she\'97\'94 he pushed his\
      dessert plate away, got up, and went to the window.\
\
      Holly, too, got up, and put her arm round his waist.\
\
      \'93Don't be angry, Jon dear. We can't all see people in the same\
      light, can we? You know, I believe each of us only has about one\
      or two people who can see the best that's in us, and bring it\
      out. For you I think it's your mother. I once saw her looking at\
      a letter of yours; it was wonderful to see her face. I think\
      she's the most beautiful woman I ever saw\'97Age doesn't seem to\
      touch her.\'94\
\
      Jon's face softened; then again became tense. Everybody\'97everybody\
      was against him and Fleur! It all strengthened the appeal of her\
      words: \'93Make sure of me\'97marry me, Jon!\'94\
\
      Here, where he had passed that wonderful week with her\'97the tug of\
      her enchantment, the ache in his heart increased with every\
      minute that she was not there to make the room, the garden, the\
      very air magical. Would he ever be able to live down here, not\
      seeing her? And he closed up utterly, going early to bed. It\
      would not make him healthy, wealthy, and wise, but it closeted\
      him with memory of Fleur in her fancy frock. He heard Val's\
      arrival\'97the Ford discharging cargo, then the stillness of the\
      summer night stole back\'97with only the bleating of very distant\
      sheep, and a night-Jar's harsh purring. He leaned far out. Cold\
      moon\'97warm air\'97the Downs like silver! Small wings, a stream\
      bubbling, the rambler roses! God\'97how empty all of it without her!\
      In the Bible it was written: Thou shalt leave father and mother\
      and cleave to\'97Fleur!\
\
      Let him have pluck, and go and tell them! They couldn't stop him\
      marrying her\'97they wouldn't want to stop him when they knew how he\
      felt. Yes! He would go! Bold and open\'97Fleur was wrong!\
\
      The night-jar ceased, the sheep were silent; the only sound in\
      the darkness was the bubbling of the stream. And Jon in his bed\
      slept, freed from the worst of life's evils\'97indecision.\
\
\
\
\
      XI.\'97TIMOTHY PROPHESIES\
\
      On the day of the cancelled meeting at the National Gallery began\
      the second anniversary of the resurrection of England's pride and\
      glory\'97or, more shortly, the top hat. \'93Lord's\'94\'97that festival which\
      the War had driven from the field\'97raised its light and dark blue\
      flags for the second time, displaying almost every feature of a\
      glorious past. Here, in the luncheon interval, were all species\
      of female and one species of male hat, protecting the multiple\
      types of face associated with \'93the classes.\'94 The observing\
      Forsyte might discern in the free or unconsidered seats a certain\
      number of the squash-hatted, but they hardly ventured on the\
      grass; the old school\'97or schools\'97could still rejoice that the\
      proletariat was not yet paying the necessary half-crown. Here was\
      still a close borough, the only one left on a large scale\'97for the\
      papers were about to estimate the attendance at ten thousand. And\
      the ten thousand, all animated by one hope, were asking each\
      other one question: \'93Where are you lunching?\'94 Something\
      wonderfully uplifting and reassuring in that query and the sight\
      of so many people like themselves voicing it! What reserve power\
      in the British realm\'97enough pigeons, lobsters, lamb, salmon\
      mayonnaise, strawberries, and bottles of champagne to feed the\
      lot! No miracle in prospect\'97no case of seven loaves and a few\
      fishes\'97faith rested on surer foundations. Six thousand top hats,\
      four thousand parasols would be doffed and furled, ten thousand\
      mouths all speaking the same English would be filled. There was\
      life in the old dog yet! Tradition! And again Tradition! How\
      strong and how elastic! Wars might rage, taxation prey, Trades\
      Unions take toll, and Europe perish of starvation; but the ten\
      thousand would be fed; and, within their ring fence, stroll upon\
      green turf, wear their top hats, and meet\'97themselves. The heart\
      was sound, the pulse still regular. E-ton! E-ton! Har-r-o-o-o-w!\
\
      Among the many Forsytes, present on a hunting-ground theirs, by\
      personal prescriptive right, or proxy, was Soames with his wife\
      and daughter. He had not been at either school, he took no\
      interest in cricket, but he wanted Fleur to show her frock, and\
      he wanted to wear his top hat parade it again in peace and plenty\
      among his peers. He walked sedately with Fleur between him and\
      Annette. No women equalled them, so far as he could see. They\
      could walk, and hold themselves up; there was substance in their\
      good looks; the modern woman had no build, no chest, no anything!\
      He remembered suddenly with what intoxication of pride he had\
      walked round with Irene in the first years of his first marriage.\
      And how they used to lunch on the drag which his mother would\
      make his father have, because it was so \'93chic\'94\'97all drags and\
      carriages in those days, not these lumbering great Stands! And\
      how consistently Montague Dartie had drunk too much. He supposed\
      that people drank too much still, but there was not the scope for\
      it there used to be. He remembered George Forsyte\'97whose brothers\
      Roger and Eustace had been at Harrow and Eton\'97towering up on the\
      top of the drag waving a light-blue flag with one hand and a\
      dark-blue flag with the other, and shouting \'93Etroow-Harrton!\'94\
      Just when everybody was silent, like the buffoon he had always\
      been; and Eustace got up to the nines below, too dandified to\
      wear any colour or take any notice. H'm! Old days, and Irene in\
      grey silk shot with palest green. He looked, sideways, at Fleur's\
      face. Rather colourless-no light, no eagerness! That love affair\
      was preying on her\'97a bad business! He looked beyond, at his\
      wife's face, rather more touched up than usual, a little\
      disdainful\'97not that she had any business to disdain, so far as he\
      could see. She was taking Profond's defection with curious\
      quietude; or was his \'93small\'94 voyage just a blind? If so, he\
      should refuse to see it! Having promenaded round the pitch and in\
      front of the pavilion, they sought Winifred's table in the\
      Bedouin Club tent. This Club\'97a new \'93cock and hen\'94\'97had been\
      founded in the interests of travel, and of a gentleman with an\
      old Scottish name, whose father had somewhat strangely been\
      called Levi. Winifred had joined, not because she had travelled,\
      but because instinct told her that a Club with such a name and\
      such a founder was bound to go far; if one didn't join at once\
      one might never have the chance. Its tent, with a text from the\
      Koran on an orange ground, and a small green camel embroidered\
      over the entrance, was the most striking on the ground. Outside\
      it they found Jack Cardigan in a dark blue tie (he had once\
      played for Harrow), batting with a Malacca cane to show how that\
      fellow ought to have hit that ball. He piloted them in. Assembled\
      in Winifred's corner were Imogen, Benedict with his young wife,\
      Val Dartie without Holly, Maud and her husband, and, after Soames\
      and his two were seated, one empty place.\
\
      \'93I'm expecting Prosper,\'94 said Winifred, \'93but he's so busy with\
      his yacht.\'94\
\
      Soames stole a glance. No movement in his wife's face! Whether\
      that fellow were coming or not, she evidently knew all about it.\
      It did not escape him that Fleur, too, looked at her mother. If\
      Annette didn't respect his feelings, she might think of Fleur's!\
      The conversation, very desultory, was syncopated by Jack Cardigan\
      talking about \'93mid-off.\'94 He cited all the \'93great mid-offs\'94 from\
      the beginning of time, as if they had been a definite racial\
      entity in the composition of the British people. Soames had\
      finished his lobster, and was beginning on pigeon-pie, when he\
      heard the words, \'93I'm a small bit late, Mrs. Dartie,\'94 and saw\
      that there was no longer any empty place. That fellow was sitting\
      between Annette and Imogen. Soames ate steadily on, with an\
      occasional word to Maud and Winifred. Conversation buzzed around\
      him. He heard the voice of Profond say:\
\
      \'93I think you're mistaken, Mrs. Forsyde; I'll\'97I'll bet Miss\
      Forsyde agrees with me.\'94\
\
      \'93In what?\'94 came Fleur's clear voice across the table.\
\
      \'93I was sayin', young gurls are much the same as they always\
      were\'97there's very small difference.\'94\
\
      \'93Do you know so much about them?\'94\
\
      That sharp reply caught the ears of all, and Soames moved\
      uneasily on his thin green chair.\
\
      \'93Well, I don't know, I think they want their own small way, and I\
      think they always did.\'94\
\
      \'93Indeed!\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, but\'97Prosper,\'94 Winifred interjected comfortably, \'93the girls\
      in the streets\'97the girls who've been in munitions, the little\
      flappers in the shops; their manners now really quite hit you in\
      the eye.\'94\
\
      At the word \'93hit\'94 Jack Cardigan stopped his disquisition; and in\
      the silence Monsieur Profond said:\
\
      \'93It was inside before, now it's outside; that's all.\'94\
\
      \'93But their morals!\'94 cried Imogen.\
\
      \'93Just as moral as they ever were, Mrs. Cardigan, but they've got\
      more opportunity.\'94\
\
      The saying, so cryptically cynical, received a little laugh from\
      Imogen, a slight opening of Jack Cardigan's mouth, and a creak\
      from Soames' chair.\
\
      Winifred said: \'93That's too bad, Prosper.\'94\
\
      \'93What do you say, Mrs. Forsyde; don't you think human nature's\
      always the same?\'94\
\
      Soames subdued a sudden longing to get up and kick the fellow. He\
      heard his wife reply:\
\
      \'93Human nature is not the same in England as anywhere else.\'94 That\
      was her confounded mockery!\
\
      \'93Well, I don't know much about this small country\'94\'97'No, thank\
      God!' thought Soames\'97\'93but I should say the pot was boilin' under\
      the lid everywhere. We all want pleasure, and we always did.\'94\
\
      Damn the fellow! His cynicism was\'97was outrageous!\
\
      When lunch was over they broke up into couples for the digestive\
      promenade. Too proud to notice, Soames knew perfectly that\
      Annette and that fellow had gone prowling round together. Fleur\
      was with Val; she had chosen him, no doubt, because he knew that\
      boy. He himself had Winifred for partner. They walked in the\
      bright, circling stream, a little flushed and sated, for some\
      minutes, till Winifred sighed:\
\
      \'93I wish we were back forty years, old boy!\'94\
\
      Before the eyes of her spirit an interminable procession of her\
      own \'93Lord's\'94 frocks was passing, paid for with the money of her\
      father, to save a recurrent crisis. \'93It's been very amusing,\
      after all. Sometimes I even wish Monty was back. What do you\
      think of people nowadays, Soames?\'94\
\
      \'93Precious little style. The thing began to go to pieces with\
      bicycles and motor-cars; the War has finished it.\'94\
\
      \'93I wonder what's coming?\'94 said Winifred in a voice dreamy from\
      pigeon-pie. \'93I'm not at all sure we shan't go back to crinolines\
      and pegtops. Look at that dress!\'94\
\
      Soames shook his head.\
\
      \'93There's money, but no faith in things. We don't lay by for the\
      future. These youngsters\'97it's all a short life and a merry one\
      with them.\'94\
\
      \'93There's a hat!\'94 said Winifred. \'93I don't know\'97when you come to\
      think of the people killed and all that in the War, it's rather\
      wonderful, I think. There's no other country\'97Prosper says the\
      rest are all bankrupt, except America; and of course her men\
      always took their style in dress from us.\'94\
\
      \'93Is that chap,\'94 said Soames, \'93really going to the South Seas?\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! one never knows where Prosper's going!\'94\
\
      \'93He's a sign of the times,\'94 muttered Soames, \'93if you like.\'94\
\
      Winifred's hand gripped his arm.\
\
      \'93Don't turn your head,\'94 she said in a low voice, \'93but look to\
      your right in the front row of the Stand.\'94\
\
      Soames looked as best he could under that limitation. A man in a\
      grey top hat, grey-bearded, with thin brown, folded cheeks, and a\
      certain elegance of posture, sat there with a woman in a\
      lawn-coloured frock, whose dark eyes were fixed on himself.\
      Soames looked quickly at his feet. How funnily feet moved, one\
      after the other like that! Winifred's voice said in his ear:\
\
      \'93Jolyon looks very ill; but he always had style. She doesn't\
      change\'97except her hair.\'94\
\
      \'93Why did you tell Fleur about that business?\'94\
\
      \'93I didn't; she picked it up. I always knew she would.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, it's a mess. She's set her heart upon their boy.\'94\
\
      \'93The little wretch,\'94 murmured Winifred. \'93She tried to take me in\
      about that. What shall you do, Soames?\'94\
\
      \'93Be guided by events.\'94\
\
      They moved on, silent, in the almost solid crowd.\
\
      \'93Really,\'94 said Winifred suddenly; \'93it almost seems like Fate.\
      Only that's so old-fashioned. Look! there are George and\
      Eustace!\'94\
\
      George Forsyte's lofty bulk had halted before them.\
\
      \'93Hallo, Soames!\'94 he said. \'93Just met Profond and your wife. You'll\
      catch 'em if you put on pace. Did you ever go to see old\
      Timothy?\'94\
\
      Soames nodded, and the streams forced them apart.\
\
      \'93I always liked old George,\'94 said Winifred. \'93He's so droll.\'94\
\
      \'93I never did,\'94 said Soames. \'93Where's your seat? I shall go to\
      mine. Fleur may be back there.\'94\
\
      Having seen Winifred to her seat, he regained his own, conscious\
      of small, white, distant figures running, the click of the bat,\
      the cheers and counter-cheers. No Fleur, and no Annette! You\
      could expect nothing of women nowadays! They had the vote. They\
      were \'93emancipated,\'94 and much good it was doing them! So Winifred\
      would go back, would she, and put up with Dartie all over again?\
      To have the past once more\'97to be sitting here as he had sat in\
      '83 and '84, before he was certain that his marriage with Irene\
      had gone all wrong, before her antagonism had become so glaring\
      that with the best will in the world he could not overlook it.\
      The sight of her with that fellow had brought all memory back.\
      Even now he could not understand why she had been so\
      impracticable. She could love other men; she had it in her! To\
      himself, the one person she ought to have loved, she had chosen\
      to refuse her heart. It seemed to him, fantastically, as he\
      looked back, that all this modern relaxation of marriage\'97though\
      its forms and laws were the same as when he married her\'97that all\
      this modern looseness had come out of her revolt; it seemed to\
      him, fantastically, that she had started it, till all decent\
      ownership of anything had gone, or was on the point of going. All\
      came from her! And now\'97a pretty state of things! Homes! How could\
      you have them without mutual ownership? Not that he had ever had\
      a real home! But had that been his fault? He had done his best.\
      And his rewards were\'97those two sitting in that Stand, and this\
      affair of Fleur's!\
\
      And overcome by loneliness he thought: 'Shan't wait any longer!\
      They must find their own way back to the hotel\'97if they mean to\
      come!' Hailing a cab outside the ground, he said:\
\
      \'93Drive me to the Bayswater Road.\'94 His old aunts had never failed\
      him. To them he had meant an ever-welcome visitor. Though they\
      were gone, there, still, was Timothy!\
\
      Smither was standing in the open doorway.\
\
      \'93Mr. Soames! I was just taking the air. Cook will be so pleased.\'94\
\
      \'93How is Mr. Timothy?\'94\
\
      \'93Not himself at all these last few days, sir; he's been talking a\
      great deal. Only this morning he was saying: 'My brother James,\
      he's getting old.' His mind wanders, Mr. Soames, and then he will\
      talk of them. He troubles about their investments. The other day\
      he said: 'There's my brother Jolyon won't look at Consols'\'97he\
      seemed quite down about it. Come in, Mr. Soames, come in! It's\
      such a pleasant change!\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Soames, \'93just for a few minutes.\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 murmured Smither in the hall, where the air had the\
      singular freshness of the outside day, \'93we haven't been very\
      satisfied with him, not all this week. He's always been one to\
      leave a titbit to the end; but ever since Monday he's been eating\
      it first. If you notice a dog, Mr. Soames, at its dinner, it eats\
      the meat first. We've always thought it such a good sign of Mr.\
      Timothy at his age to leave it to the last, but now he seems to\
      have lost all his self-control; and, of course, it makes him\
      leave the rest. The doctor doesn't make anything of it,\
      but\'94\'97Smither shook her head\'97\'93he seems to think he's got to eat it\
      first, in case he shouldn't get to it. That and his talking makes\
      us anxious.\'94\
\
      \'93Has he said anything important?\'94\
\
      \'93I shouldn't like to say that, Mr. Soames; but he's turned\
      against his Will. He gets quite pettish\'97and after having had it\
      out every morning for years, it does seem funny. He said the\
      other day: 'They want my money.' It gave me such a turn, because,\
      as I said to him, nobody wants his money, I'm sure. And it does\
      seem a pity he should be thinking about money at his time of\
      life. I took my courage in my 'ands. 'You know, Mr. Timothy,' I\
      said, 'my dear mistress'\'97that's Miss Forsyte, Mr. Soames, Miss\
      Ann that trained me\'97'she never thought about money,' I said, 'it\
      was all character with her.' He looked at me, I can't tell you\
      how funny, and he said quite dry: 'Nobody wants my character.'\
      Think of his saying a thing like that! But sometimes he'll say\
      something as sharp and sensible as anything.\'94\
\
      Soames, who had been staring at an old print by the hat-rack,\
      thinking, 'That's got value!' murmured: \'93I'll go up and see him,\
      Smither.\'94\
\
      \'93Cook's with him,\'94 answered Smither above her corsets; \'93she will\
      be pleased to see you.\'94\
\
      He mounted slowly, with the thought: 'Shan't care to live to be\
      that age.'\
\
      On the second floor, he paused, and tapped. The door was opened,\
      and he saw the round homely face of a woman about sixty.\
\
      \'93Mr. Soames!\'94 she said: \'93Why! Mr. Soames!\'94\
\
      Soames nodded. \'93All right, Cook!\'94 and entered.\
\
      Timothy was propped up in bed, with his hands joined before his\
      chest, and his eyes fixed on the ceiling, where a fly was\
      standing upside down. Soames stood at the foot of the bed, facing\
      him.\
\
      \'93Uncle Timothy,\'94 he said, raising his voice. \'93Uncle Timothy!\'94\
\
      Timothy's eyes left the fly, and levelled themselves on his\
      visitor. Soames could see his pale tongue passing over his\
      darkish lips.\
\
      \'93Uncle Timothy,\'94 he said again, \'93is there anything I can do for\
      you? Is there anything you'd like to say?\'94\
\
      \'93Ha!\'94 said Timothy.\
\
      \'93I've come to look you up and see that everything's all right.\'94\
\
      Timothy nodded. He seemed trying to get used to the apparition\
      before him.\
\
      \'93Have you got everything you want?\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Timothy.\
\
      \'93Can I get you anything?\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 said Timothy.\
\
      \'93I'm Soames, you know; your nephew, Soames Forsyte. Your brother\
      James' son.\'94\
\
      Timothy nodded.\
\
      \'93I shall be delighted to do anything I can for you.\'94\
\
      Timothy beckoned. Soames went close to him:\
\
      \'93You\'97\'94 said Timothy in a voice which seemed to have outlived\
      tone, \'93you tell them all from me\'97you tell them all\'97\'94 and his\
      finger tapped on Soames' arm, \'93to hold on\'97hold on\'97Consols are\
      goin' up,\'94 and he nodded thrice.\
\
      \'93All right!\'94 said Soames; \'93I will.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Timothy, and, fixing his eyes again on the ceiling,\
      he added: \'93That fly!\'94\
\
      Strangely moved, Soames looked at the Cook's pleasant fattish\
      face, all little puckers from staring at fires.\
\
      \'93That'll do him a world of good, sir,\'94 she said.\
\
      A mutter came from Timothy, but he was clearly speaking to\
      himself, and Soames went out with the cook.\
\
      \'93I wish I could make you a pink cream, Mr. Soames, like in old\
      days; you did so relish them. Good-bye, sir; it has been a\
      pleasure.\'94\
\
      \'93Take care of him, Cook, he is old.\'94\
\
      And, shaking her crumpled hand, he went down-stairs. Smither was\
      still taking the air in the doorway.\
\
      \'93What do you think of him, Mr. Soames?\'94\
\
      \'93H'm!\'94 Soames murmured: \'93He's lost touch.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Smither, \'93I was afraid you'd think that coming fresh\
      out of the world to see him like.\'94\
\
      \'93Smither,\'94 said Soames, \'93we're all indebted to you.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, no, Mr. Soames, don't say that! It's a pleasure\'97he's such a\
      wonderful man.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, good-bye!\'94 said Soames, and got into his taxi.\
\
      'Going up!' he thought; 'going up!'\
\
      Reaching the hotel at Knightsbridge he went to their\
      sitting-room, and rang for tea. Neither of them were in. And\
      again that sense of loneliness came over him. These hotels. What\
      monstrous great places they were now! He could remember when\
      there was nothing bigger than Long's or Brown's, Morley's or the\
      Tavistock, and the heads that were shaken over the Langham and\
      the Grand. Hotels and Clubs\'97Clubs and Hotels; no end to them now!\
      And Soames, who had just been watching at Lord's a miracle of\
      tradition and continuity, fell into reverie over the changes in\
      that London where he had been born five-and-sixty years before.\
      Whether Consols were going up or not, London had become a\
      terrific property. No such property in the world, unless it were\
      New York! There was a lot of hysteria in the papers nowadays; but\
      any one who, like himself, could remember London sixty years ago,\
      and see it now, realised the fecundity and elasticity of wealth.\
      They had only to keep their heads, and go at it steadily. Why! he\
      remembered cobblestones, and stinking straw on the floor of your\
      cab. And old Timothy\'97what could he not have told them, if he had\
      kept his memory! Things were unsettled, people in a funk or in a\
      hurry, but here were London and the Thames, and out there the\
      British Empire, and the ends of the earth. \'93Consols are goin'\
      up!\'94 He should n't be a bit surprised. It was the breed that\
      counted. And all that was bull-dogged in Soames stared for a\
      moment out of his grey eyes, till diverted by the print of a\
      Victorian picture on the walls. The hotel had bought three dozen\
      of that little lot! The old hunting or \'93Rake's Progress\'94 prints\
      in the old inns were worth looking at\'97but this sentimental\
      stuff\'97well, Victorianism had gone! \'93Tell them to hold on!\'94 old\
      Timothy had said. But to what were they to hold on in this modern\
      welter of the \'93democratic principle\'94? Why, even privacy was\
      threatened! And at the thought that privacy might perish, Soames\
      pushed back his teacup and went to the window. Fancy owning no\
      more of Nature than the crowd out there owned of the flowers and\
      trees and waters of Hyde Park! No, no! Private possession\
      underlay everything worth having. The world had slipped its\
      sanity a bit, as dogs now and again at full moon slipped theirs\
      and went off for a night's rabbiting; but the world, like the\
      dog, knew where its bread was buttered and its bed warm, and\
      would come back sure enough to the only home worth having\'97to\
      private ownership. The world was in its second childhood for the\
      moment, like old Timothy\'97eating its titbit first!\
\
      He heard a sound behind him, and saw that his wife and daughter\
      had come in.\
\
      \'93So you're back!\'94 he said.\
\
      Fleur did not answer; she stood for a moment looking at him and\
      her mother, then passed into her bedroom. Annette poured herself\
      out a cup of tea.\
\
      \'93I am going to Paris, to my mother, Soames.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! To your mother?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      \'93For how long?\'94\
\
      \'93I do not know.\'94\
\
      \'93And when are you going?\'94\
\
      \'93On Monday.\'94\
\
      Was she really going to her mother? Odd, how indifferent he felt!\
      Odd, how clearly she had perceived the indifference he would feel\
      so long as there was no scandal. And suddenly between her and\
      himself he saw distinctly the face he had seen that\
      afternoon\'97Irene's.\
\
      \'93Will you want money?\'94\
\
      \'93Thank you; I have enough.\'94\
\
      \'93Very well. Let us know when you are coming back.\'94\
\
      Annette put down the cake she was fingering, and, looking up\
      through darkened lashes, said:\
\
      \'93Shall I give Maman any message?\'94\
\
      \'93My regards.\'94\
\
      Annette stretched herself, her hands on her waist, and said in\
      French:\
\
      \'93What luck that you have never loved me, Soames!\'94 Then rising,\
      she too left the room. Soames was glad she had spoken it in\
      French\'97it seemed to require no dealing with. Again that other\
      face\'97pale, dark-eyed, beautiful still! And there stirred far down\
      within him the ghost of warmth, as from sparks lingering beneath\
      a mound of flaky ash. And Fleur infatuated with her boy! Queer\
      chance! Yet, was there such a thing as chance? A man went down a\
      street, a brick fell on his head. Ah! that was chance, no doubt.\
      But this! \'93Inherited,\'94 his girl had said. She\'97she was \'93holding\
      on\'94!\
\
\
\
\
      PART III\
\
\
\
\
\
      I.\'97OLD JOLYON WALKS\
\
      Twofold impulse had made Jolyon say to his wife at breakfast\
      \'93Let's go up to Lord's!\'94\
\
      \'93Wanted\'94\'97something to abate the anxiety in which those two had\
      lived during the sixty hours since Jon had brought Fleur down.\
      \'93Wanted\'94\'97too, that which might assuage the pangs of memory in one\
      who knew he might lose them any day!\
\
      Fifty-eight years ago Jolyon had become an Eton boy, for old\
      Jolyon's whim had been that he should be canonised at the\
      greatest possible expense. Year after year he had gone to Lord's\
      from Stanhope Gate with a father whose youth in the\
      eighteen-twenties had been passed without polish in the game of\
      cricket. Old Jolyon would speak quite openly of swipes, full\
      tosses, half and three-quarter balls; and young Jolyon with the\
      guileless snobbery of youth had trembled lest his sire should be\
      overheard. Only in this supreme matter of cricket he had been\
      nervous, for his father\'97in Crimean whiskers then\'97had ever\
      impressed him as the beau ideal. Though never canonised himself,\
      Old Jolyon's natural fastidiousness and balance had saved him\
      from the errors of the vulgar. How delicious, after bowling in a\
      top hat and a sweltering heat, to go home with his father in a\
      hansom cab, bathe, dress, and forth to the \'93Disunion\'94 Club, to\
      dine off white bait, cutlets, and a tart, and go\'97two \'93swells,\'94\
      old and young, in lavender kid gloves\'97to the opera or play. And\
      on Sunday, when the match was over, and his top hat duly broken,\
      down with his father in a special hansom to the \'93Crown and\
      Sceptre,\'94 and the terrace above the river\'97the golden sixties when\
      the world was simple, dandies glamorous, Democracy not born, and\
      the books of Whyte Melville coming thick and fast.\
\
      A generation later, with his own boy, Jolly, Harrow-buttonholed\
      with corn-flowers\'97by old Jolyon's whim his grandson had been\
      canonised at a trifle less expense\'97again Jolyon had experienced\
      the heat and counter-passions of the day, and come back to the\
      cool and the strawberry beds of Robin Hill, and billiards after\
      dinner, his boy making the most heart-breaking flukes and trying\
      to seem languid and grown-up. Those two days each year he and his\
      son had been alone together in the world, one on each side\'97and\
      Democracy just born!\
\
      And so, he had unearthed a grey top hat, borrowed a tiny bit of\
      light-blue ribbon from Irene, and gingerly, keeping cool, by car\
      and train and taxi, had reached Lord's Ground. There, beside her\
      in a lawn-coloured frock with narrow black edges, he had watched\
      the game, and felt the old thrill stir within him.\
\
      When Soames passed, the day was spoiled. Irene's face was\
      distorted by compression of the lips. No good to go on sitting\
      here with Soames or perhaps his daughter recurring in front of\
      them, like decimals. And he said:\
\
      \'93Well, dear, if you've had enough\'97let's go!\'94\
\
      That evening Jolyon felt exhausted. Not wanting her to see him\
      thus, he waited till she had begun to play, and stole off to the\
      little study. He opened the long window for air, and the door,\
      that he might still hear her music drifting in; and, settled in\
      his father's old armchair, closed his eyes, with his head against\
      the worn brown leather. Like that passage of the Cesar Franck\
      Sonata\'97so had been his life with her, a divine third movement.\
      And now this business of Jon's\'97this bad business! Drifted to the\
      edge of consciousness, he hardly knew if it were in sleep that he\
      smelled the scent of a cigar, and seemed to see his father in the\
      blackness before his closed eyes. That shape formed, went, and\
      formed again; as if in the very chair where he himself was\
      sitting, he saw his father, black-coated, with knees crossed,\
      glasses balanced between thumb and finger; saw the big white\
      moustaches, and the deep eyes looking up below a dome of forehead\
      and seeming to search his own, seeming to speak. \'93Are you facing\
      it, Jo? It's for you to decide. She's only a woman!\'94 Ah! how well\
      he knew his father in that phrase; how all the Victorian Age came\
      up with it! And his answer \'93No, I've funked it\'97funked hurting her\
      and Jon and myself. I've got a heart; I've funked it.\'94 But the\
      old eyes, so much older, so much younger than his own, kept at\
      it; \'93It's your wife, your son; your past. Tackle it, my boy!\'94 Was\
      it a message from walking spirit; or but the instinct of his sire\
      living on within him? And again came that scent of cigar\
      smoke-from the old saturated leather. Well! he would tackle it,\
      write to Jon, and put the whole thing down in black and white!\
      And suddenly he breathed with difficulty, with a sense of\
      suffocation, as if his heart were swollen. He got up and went out\
      into the air. The stars were very bright. He passed along the\
      terrace round the corner of the house, till, through the window\
      of the music-room, he could see Irene at the piano, with\
      lamp-light falling on her powdery hair; withdrawn into herself\
      she seemed, her dark eyes staring straight before her, her hands\
      idle. Jolyon saw her raise those hands and clasp them over her\
      breast. 'It's Jon, with her,' he thought; 'all Jon! I'm dying out\
      of her\'97it's natural!'\
\
      And, careful not to be seen, he stole back.\
\
      Next day, after a bad night, he sat down to his task. He wrote\
      with difficulty and many erasures.\
\
      \'93MY DEAREST BOY,\
\
      \'93You are old enough to understand how very difficult it is for\
      elders to give themselves away to their young. Especially\
      when\'97like your mother and myself, though I shall never think of\
      her as anything but young\'97their hearts are altogether set on him\
      to whom they must confess. I cannot say we are conscious of\
      having sinned exactly\'97people in real life very seldom are, I\
      believe\'97but most persons would say we had, and at all events our\
      conduct, righteous or not, has found us out. The truth is, my\
      dear, we both have pasts, which it is now my task to make known\
      to you, because they so grievously and deeply affect your future.\
      Many, very many years ago, as far back indeed as 1883, when she\
      was only twenty, your mother had the great and lasting misfortune\
      to make an unhappy marriage\'97no, not with me, Jon. Without money\
      of her own, and with only a stepmother\'97closely related to\
      Jezebel\'97she was very unhappy in her home life. It was Fleur's\
      father that she married, my cousin Soames Forsyte. He had pursued\
      her very tenaciously and to do him justice was deeply in love\
      with her. Within a week she knew the fearful mistake she had\
      made. It was not his fault; it was her error of judgment\'97her\
      misfortune.\'94\
\
      So far Jolyon had kept some semblance of irony, but now his\
      subject carried him away.\
\
      \'93Jon, I want to explain to you if I can\'97and it's very hard\'97how it\
      is that an unhappy marriage such as this can so easily come\
      about. You will of course say: 'If she didn't really love him how\
      could she ever have married him?' You would be right if it were\
      not for one or two rather terrible considerations. From this\
      initial mistake of hers all the subsequent trouble, sorrow, and\
      tragedy have come, and so I must make it clear to you if I can.\
      You see, Jon, in those days and even to this day\'97indeed, I don't\
      see, for all the talk of enlightenment, how it can well be\
      otherwise\'97most girls are married ignorant of the sexual side of\
      life. Even if they know what it means they have not experienced\
      it. That's the crux. It is this actual lack of experience,\
      whatever verbal knowledge they have, which makes all the\
      difference and all the trouble. In a vast number of marriages-and\
      your mother's was one\'97girls are not and cannot be certain whether\
      they love the man they marry or not; they do not know until after\
      that act of union which makes the reality of marriage. Now, in\
      many, perhaps in most doubtful cases, this act cements and\
      strengthens the attachment, but in other cases, and your mother's\
      was one, it is a revelation of mistake, a destruction of such\
      attraction as there was. There is nothing more tragic in a\
      woman's life than such a revelation, growing daily, nightly\
      clearer. Coarse-grained and unthinking people are apt to laugh at\
      such a mistake, and say, 'What a fuss about nothing!' Narrow and\
      self-righteous people, only capable of judging the lives of\
      others by their own, are apt to condemn those who make this\
      tragic error, to condemn them for life to the dungeons they have\
      made for themselves. You know the expression: 'She has made her\
      bed, she must lie on it!' It is a hard-mouthed saying, quite\
      unworthy of a gentleman or lady in the best sense of those words;\
      and I can use no stronger condemnation. I have not been what is\
      called a moral man, but I wish to use no words to you, my dear,\
      which will make you think lightly of ties or contracts into which\
      you enter. Heaven forbid! But with the experience of a life\
      behind me I do say that those who condemn the victims of these\
      tragic mistakes, condemn them and hold out no hands to help them,\
      are inhuman, or rather they would be if they had the\
      understanding to know what they are doing. But they haven't! Let\
      them go! They are as much anathema to me as I, no doubt, am to\
      them. I have had to say all this, because I am going to put you\
      into a position to judge your mother, and you are very young,\
      without experience of what life is. To go on with the story.\
      After three years of effort to subdue her shrinking\'97I was going\
      to say her loathing and it's not too strong a word, for shrinking\
      soon becomes loathing under such circumstances\'97three years of\
      what to a sensitive, beauty-loving nature like your mother's,\
      Jon, was torment, she met a young man who fell in love with her.\
      He was the architect of this very house that we live in now, he\
      was building it for her and Fleur's father to live in, a new\
      prison to hold her, in place of the one she inhabited with him in\
      London. Perhaps that fact played some part in what came of it.\
      But in any case she, too, fell in love with him. I know it's not\
      necessary to explain to you that one does not precisely choose\
      with whom one will fall in love. It comes. Very well! It came. I\
      can imagine\'97though she never said much to me about it\'97the\
      struggle that then took place in her, because, Jon, she was\
      brought up strictly and was not light in her ideas\'97not at all.\
      However, this was an overwhelming feeling, and it came to pass\
      that they loved in deed as well as in thought. Then came a\
      fearful tragedy. I must tell you of it because if I don't you\
      will never understand the real situation that you have now to\
      face. The man whom she had married\'97Soames Forsyte, the father of\
      Fleur one night, at the height of her passion for this young man,\
      forcibly reasserted his rights over her. The next day she met her\
      lover and told him of it. Whether he committed suicide or whether\
      he was accidentally run over in his distraction, we never knew;\
      but so it was. Think of your mother as she was that evening when\
      she heard of his death. I happened to see her. Your grandfather\
      sent me to help her if I could. I only just saw her, before the\
      door was shut against me by her husband. But I have never\
      forgotten her face, I can see it now. I was not in love with her\
      then, not for twelve years after, but I have never forgotten. My\
      dear boy\'97it is not easy to write like this. But you see, I must.\
      Your mother is wrapped up in you, utterly, devotedly. I don't\
      wish to write harshly of Soames Forsyte. I don't think harshly of\
      him. I have long been sorry for him; perhaps I was sorry even\
      then. As the world judges she was in error, he within his rights.\
      He loved her\'97in his way. She was his property. That is the view\
      he holds of life\'97of human feelings and hearts\'97property. It's not\
      his fault\'97so was he born. To me it is a view that has always been\
      abhorrent\'97so was I born! Knowing you as I do, I feel it cannot be\
      otherwise than abhorrent to you. Let me go on with the story.\
      Your mother fled from his house that night; for twelve years she\
      lived quietly alone without companionship of any sort, until in\
      1899 her husband\'97you see, he was still her husband, for he did\
      not attempt to divorce her, and she of course had no right to\
      divorce him\'97became conscious, it seems, of the want of children,\
      and commenced a long attempt to induce her to go back to him and\
      give him a child. I was her trustee then, under your\
      Grandfather's Will, and I watched this going on. While watching,\
      I became attached to her, devotedly attached. His pressure\
      increased, till one day she came to me here and practically put\
      herself under my protection. Her husband, who was kept informed\
      of all her movements, attempted to force us apart by bringing a\
      divorce suit, or possibly he really meant it, I don't know; but\
      anyway our names were publicly joined. That decided us, and we\
      became united in fact. She was divorced, married me, and you were\
      born. We have lived in perfect happiness, at least I have, and I\
      believe your mother also. Soames, soon after the divorce, married\
      Fleur's mother, and she was born. That is the story, Jon. I have\
      told it you, because by the affection which we see you have\
      formed for this man's daughter you are blindly moving toward what\
      must utterly destroy your mother's happiness, if not your own. I\
      don't wish to speak of myself, because at my age there's no use\
      supposing I shall cumber the ground much longer, besides, what I\
      should suffer would be mainly on her account, and on yours. But\
      what I want you to realise is that feelings of horror and\
      aversion such as those can never be buried or forgotten. They are\
      alive in her to-day. Only yesterday at Lord's we happened to see\
      Soames Forsyte. Her face, if you had seen it, would have\
      convinced you. The idea that you should marry his daughter is a\
      nightmare to her, Jon. I have nothing to say against Fleur save\
      that she is his daughter. But your children, if you married her,\
      would be the grandchildren of Soames, as much as of your mother,\
      of a man who once owned your mother as a man might own a slave.\
      Think what that would mean. By such a marriage you enter the camp\
      which held your mother prisoner and wherein she ate her heart\
      out. You are just on the threshold of life, you have only known\
      this girl two months, and however deeply you think you love her,\
      I appeal to you to break it off at once. Don't give your mother\
      this rankling pain and humiliation during the rest of her life.\
      Young though she will always seem to me, she is fifty-seven.\
      Except for us two she has no one in the world. She will soon have\
      only you. Pluck up your spirit, Jon, and break away. Don't put\
      this cloud and barrier between you. Don't break her heart! Bless\
      you, my dear boy, and again forgive me for all the pain this\
      letter must bring you\'97we tried to spare it you, but Spain\'97it\
      seems\'97-was no good.\
\
      \'93Ever your devoted father,\
\
      \'93JOLYON FORSYTE.\'94\
\
      Having finished his confession, Jolyon sat with a thin cheek on\
      his hand, re-reading. There were things in it which hurt him so\
      much, when he thought of Jon reading them, that he nearly tore\
      the letter up. To speak of such things at all to a boy\'97his own\
      boy\'97to speak of them in relation to his own wife and the boy's\
      own mother, seemed dreadful to the reticence of his Forsyte soul.\
      And yet without speaking of them how make Jon understand the\
      reality, the deep cleavage, the ineffaceable scar? Without them,\
      how justify this stiffing of the boy's love? He might just as\
      well not write at all!\
\
      He folded the confession, and put it in his pocket. It was\'97thank\
      Heaven!\'97Saturday; he had till Sunday evening to think it over;\
      for even if posted now it could not reach Jon till Monday. He\
      felt a curious relief at this delay, and at the fact that,\
      whether sent or not, it was written.\
\
      In the rose garden, which had taken the place of the old fernery,\
      he could see Irene snipping and pruning, with a little basket on\
      her arm. She was never idle, it seemed to him, and he envied her\
      now that he himself was idle nearly all his time. He went down to\
      her. She held up a stained glove and smiled. A piece of lace tied\
      under her chin concealed her hair, and her oval face with its\
      still dark brows looked very young.\
\
      \'93The green-fly are awful this year, and yet it's cold. You look\
      tired, Jolyon.\'94\
\
      Jolyon took the confession from his pocket. \'93I've been writing\
      this. I think you ought to see it?\'94\
\
      \'93To Jon?\'94 Her whole face had changed, in that instant, becoming\
      almost haggard.\
\
      \'93Yes; the murder's out.\'94\
\
      He gave it to her, and walked away among the roses. Presently,\
      seeing that she had finished reading and was standing quite still\
      with the sheets of the letter against her skirt, he came back to\
      her.\
\
      \'93Well?\'94\
\
      \'93It's wonderfully put. I don't see how it could be put better.\
      Thank you, dear.\'94\
\
      \'93Is there anything you would like left out?\'94\
\
      She shook her head.\
\
      \'93No; he must know all, if he's to understand.\'94\
\
      \'93That's what I thought, but\'97I hate it!\'94\
\
      He had the feeling that he hated it more than she\'97to him sex was\
      so much easier to mention between man and woman than between man\
      and man; and she had always been more natural and frank, not\
      deeply secretive like his Forsyte self.\
\
      \'93I wonder if he will understand, even now, Jolyon? He's so young;\
      and he shrinks from the physical.\'94\
\
      \'93He gets that shrinking from my father, he was as fastidious as a\
      girl in all such matters. Would it be better to rewrite the whole\
      thing, and just say you hated Soames?\'94\
\
      Irene shook her head.\
\
      \'93Hate's only a word. It conveys nothing. No, better as it is.\'94\
\
      \'93Very well. It shall go to-morrow.\'94\
\
      She raised her face to his, and in sight of the big house's many\
      creepered windows, he kissed her.\
\
\
\
\
      II.\'97CONFESSION\
\
      Late that same afternoon, Jolyon had a nap in the old armchair.\
      Face down on his knee was La Rotisserie de la Refine Pedauque,\
      and just before he fell asleep he had been thinking: 'As a people\
      shall we ever really like the French? Will they ever really like\
      us!' He himself had always liked the French, feeling at home with\
      their wit, their taste, their cooking. Irene and he had paid many\
      visits to France before the War, when Jon had been at his private\
      school. His romance with her had begun in Paris\'97his last and most\
      enduring romance. But the French\'97no Englishman could like them\
      who could not see them in some sort with the detached aesthetic\
      eye! And with that melancholy conclusion he had nodded off.\
\
      When he woke he saw Jon standing between him and the window. The\
      boy had evidently come in from the garden and was waiting for him\
      to wake. Jolyon smiled, still half asleep. How nice the chap\
      looked\'97sensitive, affectionate, straight! Then his heart gave a\
      nasty jump; and a quaking sensation overcame him. Jon! That\
      confession! He controlled himself with an effort. \'93Why, Jon,\
      where did you spring from?\'94\
\
      Jon bent over and kissed his forehead.\
\
      Only then he noticed the look on the boy's face.\
\
      \'93I came home to tell you something, Dad.\'94\
\
      With all his might Jolyon tried to get the better of the jumping,\
      gurgling sensations within his chest.\
\
      \'93Well, sit down, old man. Have you seen your mother?\'94\
\
      \'93No.\'94 The boy's flushed look gave place to pallor; he sat down on\
      the arm of the old chair, as, in old days, Jolyon himself used to\
      sit beside his own father, installed in its recesses. Right up to\
      the time of the rupture in their relations he had been wont to\
      perch there\'97had he now reached such a moment with his own son?\
      All his life he had hated scenes like poison, avoided rows, gone\
      on his own way quietly and let others go on theirs. But now\'97it\
      seemed\'97at the very end of things, he had a scene before him more\
      painful than any he had avoided. He drew a visor down over his\
      emotion, and waited for his son to speak.\
\
      \'93Father,\'94 said Jon slowly, \'93Fleur and I are engaged.\'94\
\
      'Exactly!' thought Jolyon, breathing with difficulty.\
\
      \'93I know that you and Mother don't like the idea. Fleur says that\
      Mother was engaged to her father before you married her. Of\
      course I don't know what happened, but it must be ages ago. I'm\
      devoted to her, Dad, and she says she is to me.\'94\
\
      Jolyon uttered a queer sound, half laugh, half groan.\
\
      \'93You are nineteen, Jon, and I am seventy-two. How are we to\
      understand each other in a matter like this, eh?\'94\
\
      \'93You love Mother, Dad; you must know what we feel. It isn't fair\
      to us to let old things spoil our happiness, is it?\'94\
\
      Brought face to face with his confession, Jolyon resolved to do\
      without it if by any means he could. He laid his hand on the\
      boy's arm.\
\
      \'93Look, Jon! I might put you off with talk about your both being\
      too young and not knowing your own minds, and all that, but you\
      wouldn't listen, besides, it doesn't meet the case\'97Youth,\
      unfortunately, cures itself. You talk lightly about 'old things\
      like that,' knowing nothing\'97as you say truly\'97of what happened.\
      Now, have I ever given you reason to doubt my love for you, or my\
      word?\'94\
\
      At a less anxious moment he might have been amused by the\
      conflict his words aroused\'97the boy's eager clasp, to reassure him\
      on these points, the dread on his face of what that reassurance\
      would bring forth; but he could only feel grateful for the\
      squeeze.\
\
      \'93Very well, you can believe what I tell you. If you don't give up\
      this love affair, you will make Mother wretched to the end of her\
      days. Believe me, my dear, the past, whatever it was, can't be\
      buried\'97it can't indeed.\'94\
\
      Jon got off the arm of the chair.\
\
      'The girl'\'97thought Jolyon\'97'there she goes\'97starting up before\
      him\'97life itself\'97eager, pretty, loving!'\
\
      \'93I can't, Father; how can I\'97just because you say that? Of course,\
      I can't!\'94\
\
      \'93Jon, if you knew the story you would give this up without\
      hesitation; you would have to! Can't you believe me?\'94\
\
      \'93How can you tell what I should think? Father, I love her better\
      than anything in the world.\'94\
\
      Jolyon's face twitched, and he said with painful slowness:\
\
      \'93Better than your mother, Jon?\'94\
\
      From the boy's face, and his clenched fists Jolyon realised the\
      stress and struggle he was going through.\
\
      \'93I don't know,\'94 he burst out, \'93I don't know! But to give Fleur up\
      for nothing\'97for something I don't understand, for something that\
      I don't believe can really matter half so much, will make me\'97make\
      me....\'94\
\
      \'93Make you feel us unjust, put a barrier\'97yes. But that's better\
      than going on with this.\'94\
\
      \'93I can't. Fleur loves me, and I love her. You want me to trust\
      you; why don't you trust me, Father? We wouldn't want to know\
      anything\'97we wouldn't let it make any difference. It'll only make\
      us both love you and Mother all the more.\'94\
\
      Jolyon put his hand into his breast pocket, but brought it out\
      again empty, and sat, clucking his tongue against his teeth.\
\
      \'93Think what your mother's been to you, Jon! She has nothing but\
      you; I shan't last much longer.\'94\
\
      \'93Why not? It isn't fair to\'97Why not?\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Jolyon, rather coldly, \'93because the doctors tell me\
      I shan't; that's all.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh, Dad!\'94 cried Jon, and burst into tears.\
\
      This downbreak of his son, whom he had not seen cry since he was\
      ten, moved Jolyon terribly. He recognised to the full how\
      fearfully soft the boy's heart was, how much he would suffer in\
      this business, and in life generally. And he reached out his hand\
      helplessly\'97not wishing, indeed not daring to get up.\
\
      \'93Dear man,\'94 he said, \'93don't\'97or you'll make me!\'94\
\
      Jon smothered down his paroxysm, and stood with face averted,\
      very still.\
\
      'What now?' thought Jolyon. 'What can I say to move him?'\
\
      \'93By the way, don't speak of that to Mother,\'94 he said; \'93she has\
      enough to frighten her with this affair of yours. I know how you\
      feel. But, Jon, you know her and me well enough to be sure we\
      wouldn't wish to spoil your happiness lightly. Why, my dear boy,\
      we don't care for anything but your happiness\'97at least, with me\
      it's just yours and Mother's and with her just yours. It's all\
      the future for you both that's at stake.\'94\
\
      Jon turned. His face was deadly pale; his eyes, deep in his head,\
      seemed to burn.\
\
      \'93What is it? What is it? Don't keep me like this!\'94\
\
      Jolyon, who knew that he was beaten, thrust his hand again into\
      his breast pocket, and sat for a full minute, breathing with\
      difficulty, his eyes closed. The thought passed through his mind:\
      'I've had a good long innings\'97some pretty bitter moments\'97this is\
      the worst!' Then he brought his hand out with the letter, and\
      said with a sort of fatigue: \'93Well, Jon, if you hadn't come\
      to-day, I was going to send you this. I wanted to spare you\'97I\
      wanted to spare your mother and myself, but I see it's no good.\
      Read it, and I think I'll go into the garden.\'94 He reached forward\
      to get up.\
\
      Jon, who had taken the letter, said quickly, \'93No, I'll go\'94; and\
      was gone.\
\
      Jolyon sank back in his chair. A blue-bottle chose that moment to\
      come buzzing round him with a sort of fury; the sound was homely,\
      better than nothing.... Where had the boy gone to read his\
      letter? The wretched letter\'97the wretched story! A cruel\
      business\'97cruel to her\'97to Soames\'97to those two children\'97to\
      himself!... His heart thumped and pained him. Life\'97its loves\'97its\
      work\'97its beauty\'97its aching, and\'97its end! A good time; a fine time\
      in spite of all; until\'97you regretted that you had ever been born.\
      Life\'97it wore you down, yet did not make you want to die\'97that was\
      the cunning evil! Mistake to have a heart! Again the blue-bottle\
      came buzzing\'97bringing in all the heat and hum and scent of\
      summer\'97yes, even the scent\'97as of ripe fruits, dried grasses,\
      sappy shrubs, and the vanilla breath of cows. And out there\
      somewhere in the fragrance Jon would be reading that letter,\
      turning and twisting its pages in his trouble, his bewilderment\
      and trouble\'97breaking his heart about it! The thought made Jolyon\
      acutely miserable. Jon was such a tender-hearted chap,\
      affectionate to his bones, and conscientious, too\'97it was so\
      unfair, so damned unfair! He remembered Irene saying to him once:\
      \'93Never was any one born more loving and lovable than Jon.\'94 Poor\
      little Jon! His world gone up the spout, all of a summer\
      afternoon! Youth took things so hard! And stirred, tormented by\
      that vision of Youth taking things hard, Jolyon got out of his\
      chair, and went to the window. The boy was nowhere visible. And\
      he passed out. If one could take any help to him now\'97one must!\
\
      He traversed the shrubbery, glanced into the walled garden\'97no\
      Jon! Nor where the peaches and the apricots were beginning to\
      swell and colour. He passed the Cupressus trees, dark and spiral,\
      into the meadow. Where had the boy got to? Had he rushed down to\
      the coppice\'97his old hunting-ground? Jolyon crossed the rows of\
      hay. They would cock it on Monday and be carrying the day after,\
      if rain held off. Often they had crossed this field together\'97hand\
      in hand, when Jon was a little chap. Dash it! The golden age was\
      over by the time one was ten! He came to the pond, where flies\
      and gnats were dancing over a bright reedy surface; and on into\
      the coppice. It was cool there, fragrant of larches. Still no\
      Jon! He called. No answer! On the log seat he sat down, nervous,\
      anxious, forgetting his own physical sensations. He had been\
      wrong to let the boy get away with that letter; he ought to have\
      kept him under his eye from the start! Greatly troubled, he got\
      up to retrace his steps. At the farm-buildings he called again,\
      and looked into the dark cow-house. There in the cool, and the\
      scent of vanilla and ammonia, away from flies, the three\
      Alderneys were chewing the quiet cud; just milked, waiting for\
      evening, to be turned out again into the lower field. One turned\
      a lazy head, a lustrous eye; Jolyon could see the slobber on its\
      grey lower lip. He saw everything with passionate clearness, in\
      the agitation of his nerves\'97all that in his time he had adored\
      and tried to paint\'97wonder of light and shade and colour. No\
      wonder the legend put Christ into a manger\'97what more devotional\
      than the eyes and moon-white horns of a chewing cow in the warm\
      dusk! He called again. No answer! And he hurried away out of the\
      coppice, past the pond, up the hill. Oddly ironical\'97now he came\
      to think of it\'97if Jon had taken the gruel of his discovery down\
      in the coppice where his mother and Bosinney in those old days\
      had made the plunge of acknowledging their love. Where he\
      himself, on the log seat the Sunday morning he came back from\
      Paris, had realised to the full that Irene had become the world\
      to him. That would have been the place for Irony to tear the veil\
      from before the eyes of Irene's boy! But he was not here! Where\
      had he got to? One must find the poor chap!\
\
      A gleam of sun had come, sharpening to his hurrying senses all\
      the beauty of the afternoon, of the tall trees and lengthening\
      shadows, of the blue, and the white clouds, the scent of the hay,\
      and the cooing of the pigeons; and the flower shapes standing\
      tall. He came to the rosery, and the beauty of the roses in that\
      sudden sunlight seemed to him unearthly. \'93Rose, you Spaniard!\'94\
      Wonderful three words! There she had stood by that bush of dark\
      red roses; had stood to read and decide that Jon must know it\
      all! He knew all now! Had she chosen wrong? He bent and sniffed a\
      rose, its petals brushed his nose and trembling lips; nothing so\
      soft as a rose-leaf's velvet, except her neck\'97Irene! On across\
      the lawn he went, up the slope, to the oak-tree. Its top alone\
      was glistening, for the sudden sun was away over the house; the\
      lower shade was thick, blessedly cool\'97he was greatly overheated.\
      He paused a minute with his hand on the rope of the swing\'97Jolly,\
      Holly\'97Jon! The old swing! And suddenly, he felt horribly\'97deadly\
      ill. 'I've over done it!' he thought: 'by Jove! I've overdone\
      it\'97after all!' He staggered up toward the terrace, dragged\
      himself up the steps, and fell against the wall of the house. He\
      leaned there gasping, his face buried in the honey-suckle that he\
      and she had taken such trouble with that it might sweeten the air\
      which drifted in. Its fragrance mingled with awful pain. 'My\
      love!' he thought; 'the boy!' And with a great effort he tottered\
      in through the long window, and sank into old Jolyon's chair. The\
      book was there, a pencil in it; he caught it up, scribbled a word\
      on the open page.... His hand dropped.... So it was like this\'97was\
      it?...\
\
      There was a great wrench; and darkness....\
\
\
\
\
      III.\'97IRENE\
\
      When Jon rushed away with the letter in his hand, he ran along\
      the terrace and round the corner of the house, in fear and\
      confusion. Leaning against the creepered wall he tore open the\
      letter. It was long\'97very long! This added to his fear, and he\
      began reading. When he came to the words: \'93It was Fleur's father\
      that she married,\'94 everything seemed to spin before him. He was\
      close to a window, and entering by it, he passed, through\
      music-room and hall, up to his bedroom. Dipping his face in cold\
      water, he sat on his bed, and went on reading, dropping each\
      finished page on the bed beside him. His father's writing was\
      easy to read\'97he knew it so well, though he had never had a letter\
      from him one quarter so long. He read with a dull\
      feeling\'97imagination only half at work. He best grasped, on that\
      first reading, the pain his father must have had in writing such\
      a letter. He let the last sheet fall, and in a sort of mental,\
      moral helplessness began to read the first again. It all seemed\
      to him disgusting\'97dead and disgusting. Then, suddenly, a hot wave\
      of horrified emotion tingled through him. He buried his face in\
      his hands. His mother! Fleur's father! He took up the letter\
      again, and read on mechanically. And again came the feeling that\
      it was all dead and disgusting; his own love so different! This\
      letter said his mother\'97and her father! An awful letter!\
\
      Property! Could there be men who looked on women as their\
      property? Faces seen in street and countryside came thronging up\
      before him\'97red, stock-fish faces; hard, dull faces; prim, dry\
      faces; violent faces; hundreds, thousands of them! How could he\
      know what men who had such faces thought and did? He held his\
      head in his hands and groaned. His mother! He caught up the\
      letter and read on again: \'93horror and aversion-alive in her\
      to-day.... your children.... grandchildren.... of a man who once\
      owned your mother as a man might own a slave....\'94 He got up from\
      his bed. This cruel shadowy past, lurking there to murder his\
      love and Fleur's, was true, or his father could never have\
      written it. 'Why didn't they tell me the first thing,' he\
      thought, 'the day I first saw Fleur? They knew I'd seen her. They\
      were afraid, and\'97now\'97I've\'97got it!' Overcome by misery too acute\
      for thought or reason, he crept into a dusky corner of the room\
      and sat down on the floor. He sat there, like some unhappy little\
      animal. There was comfort in dusk, and the floor\'97as if he were\
      back in those days when he played his battles sprawling all over\
      it. He sat there huddled, his hair ruffled, his hands clasped\
      round his knees, for how long he did not know. He was wrenched\
      from his blank wretchedness by the sound of the door opening from\
      his mother's room. The blinds were down over the windows of his\
      room, shut up in his absence, and from where he sat he could only\
      hear a rustle, her footsteps crossing, till beyond the bed he saw\
      her standing before his dressing-table. She had something in her\
      hand. He hardly breathed, hoping she would not see him, and go\
      away. He saw her touch things on the table as if they had some\
      virtue in them, then face the window-grey from head to foot like\
      a ghost. The least turn of her head, and she must see him! Her\
      lips moved: \'93Oh! Jon!\'94 She was speaking to herself; the tone of\
      her voice troubled Jon's heart. He saw in her hand a little\
      photograph. She held it toward the light, looking at it\'97very\
      small. He knew it\'97one of himself as a tiny boy, which she always\
      kept in her bag. His heart beat fast. And, suddenly as if she had\
      heard it, she turned her eyes and saw him. At the gasp she gave,\
      and the movement of her hands pressing the photograph against her\
      breast, he said:\
\
      \'93Yes, it's me.\'94\
\
      She moved over to the bed, and sat down on it, quite close to\
      him, her hands still clasping her breast, her feet among the\
      sheets of the letter which had slipped to the floor. She saw\
      them, and her hands grasped the edge of the bed. She sat very\
      upright, her dark eyes fixed on him. At last she spoke.\
\
      \'93Well, Jon, you know, I see.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      \'93You've seen Father?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      There was a long silence, till she said:\
\
      \'93Oh! my darling!\'94\
\
      \'93It's all right.\'94 The emotions in him were so, violent and so\
      mixed that he dared not move\'97resentment, despair, and yet a\
      strange yearning for the comfort of her hand on his forehead.\
\
      \'93What are you going to do?\'94\
\
      \'93I don't know.\'94\
\
      There was another long silence, then she got up. She stood a\
      moment, very still, made a little movement with her hand, and\
      said: \'93My darling boy, my most darling boy, don't think of\
      me\'97think of yourself,\'94 and, passing round the foot of the bed,\
      went back into her room.\
\
      Jon turned\'97curled into a sort of ball, as might a hedgehog\'97into\
      the corner made by the two walls.\
\
      He must have been twenty minutes there before a cry roused him.\
      It came from the terrace below. He got up, scared. Again came the\
      cry: \'93Jon!\'94 His mother was calling! He ran out and down the\
      stairs, through the empty dining-room into the study. She was\
      kneeling before the old armchair, and his father was lying back\
      quite white, his head on his breast, one of his hands resting on\
      an open book, with a pencil clutched in it\'97more strangely still\
      than anything he had ever seen. She looked round wildly, and\
      said:\
\
      \'93Oh! Jon\'97he's dead\'97he's dead!\'94\
\
      Jon flung himself down, and reaching over the arm of the chair,\
      where he had lately been sitting, put his lips to the forehead.\
      Icy cold! How could\'97how could Dad be dead, when only an hour\
      ago\'97! His mother's arms were round the knees; pressing her breast\
      against them. \'93Why\'97why wasn't I with him?\'94 he heard her whisper.\
      Then he saw the tottering word \'93Irene\'94 pencilled on the open\
      page, and broke down himself. It was his first sight of human\
      death, and its unutterable stillness blotted from him all other\
      emotion; all else, then, was but preliminary to this! All love\
      and life, and joy, anxiety, and sorrow, all movement, light and\
      beauty, but a beginning to this terrible white stillness. It made\
      a dreadful mark on him; all seemed suddenly little, futile,\
      short. He mastered himself at last, got up, and raised her.\
\
      \'93Mother! don't cry\'97Mother!\'94\
\
      Some hours later, when all was done that had to be, and his\
      mother was lying down, he saw his father alone, on the bed,\
      covered with a white sheet. He stood for a long time gazing at\
      that face which had never looked angry\'97always whimsical, and\
      kind. \'93To be kind and keep your end up\'97there's nothing else in\
      it,\'94 he had once heard his father say. How wonderfully Dad had\
      acted up to that philosophy! He understood now that his father\
      had known for a long time past that this would come\
      suddenly\'97known, and not said a word. He gazed with an awed and\
      passionate reverence. The loneliness of it\'97just to spare his\
      mother and himself! His own trouble seemed small while he was\
      looking at that face. The word scribbled on the page! The\
      farewell word! Now his mother had no one but himself! He went up\
      close to the dead face\'97not changed at all, and yet completely\
      changed. He had heard his father say once that he did not believe\
      in consciousness surviving death, or that if it did it might be\
      just survival till the natural age limit of the body had been\
      reached\'97the natural term of its inherent vitality; so that if the\
      body were broken by accident, excess, violent disease,\
      consciousness might still persist till, in the course of Nature\
      uninterfered with, it would naturally have faded out. It had\
      struck him because he had never heard any one else suggest it.\
      When the heart failed like this\'97surely it was not quite natural!\
      Perhaps his father's consciousness was in the room with him.\
      Above the bed hung a picture of his father's father. Perhaps his\
      consciousness, too, was still alive; and his brother's\'97his\
      half-brother, who had died in the Transvaal. Were they all\
      gathered round this bed? Jon kissed the forehead, and stole back\
      to his own room. The door between it and his mother's was ajar;\
      she had evidently been in\'97everything was ready for him, even some\
      biscuits and hot milk, and the letter no longer on the floor. He\
      ate and drank, watching the last light fade. He did not try to\
      see into the future\'97just stared at the dark branches of the\
      oak-tree, level with his window, and felt as if life had stopped.\
      Once in the night, turning in his heavy sleep, he was conscious\
      of something white and still, beside his bed, and started up.\
\
      His mother's voice said:\
\
      \'93It's only I, Jon dear!\'94 Her hand pressed his forehead gently\
      back; her white figure disappeared.\
\
      Alone! He fell heavily asleep again, and dreamed he saw his\
      mother's name crawling on his bed.\
\
\
\
\
      IV.\'97SOAMES COGITATES\
\
      The announcement in The Times of his cousin Jolyon's death\
      affected Soames quite simply. So that chap was gone! There had\
      never been a time in their two lives when love had not been lost\
      between them. That quick-blooded sentiment hatred had run its\
      course long since in Soames' heart, and he had refused to allow\
      any recrudescence, but he considered this early decease a piece\
      of poetic justice. For twenty years the fellow had enjoyed the\
      reversion of his wife and house, and\'97he was dead! The obituary\
      notice, which appeared a little later, paid Jolyon\'97he thought\'97too\
      much attention. It spoke of that \'93diligent and agreeable painter\
      whose work we have come to look on as typical of the best\
      late-Victorian water-colour art.\'94 Soames, who had almost\
      mechanically preferred Mole, Morpin, and Caswell Baye, and had\
      always sniffed quite audibly when he came to one of his cousin's\
      on the line, turned The Times with a crackle.\
\
      He had to go up to Town that morning on Forsyte affairs, and was\
      fully conscious of Gradman's glance sidelong over his spectacles.\
      The old clerk had about him an aura of regretful congratulation.\
      He smelled, as it were, of old days. One could almost hear him\
      thinking: \'93Mr. Jolyon, ye-es\'97just my age, and gone\'97dear, dear! I\
      dare say she feels it. She was a nice-lookin' woman. Flesh is\
      flesh! They've given 'im a notice in the papers. Fancy!\'94 His\
      atmosphere in fact caused Soames to handle certain leases and\
      conversions with exceptional swiftness.\
\
      \'93About that settlement on Miss Fleur, Mr. Soames?\'94\
\
      \'93I've thought better of that,\'94 answered Soames shortly.\
\
      \'93Ah! I'm glad of that. I thought you were a little hasty. The\
      times do change.\'94\
\
      How this death would affect Fleur had begun to trouble Soames. He\
      was not certain that she knew of it\'97she seldom looked at the\
      paper, never at the births, marriages, and deaths.\
\
      He pressed matters on, and made his way to Green Street for\
      lunch. Winifred was almost doleful. Jack Cardigan had broken a\
      splashboard, so far as one could make out, and would not be \'93fit\'94\
      for some time. She could not get used to the idea.\
\
      \'93Did Profond ever get off?\'94 he said suddenly.\
\
      \'93He got off,\'94 replied Winifred, \'93but where\'97I don't know.\'94\
\
      Yes, there it was\'97impossible to tell anything! Not that he wanted\
      to know. Letters from Annette were coming from Dieppe, where she\
      and her mother were staying.\
\
      \'93You saw that fellow's death, I suppose?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Winifred. \'93I'm sorry for\'97for his children. He was\
      very amiable.\'94 Soames uttered a rather queer sound. A suspicion\
      of the old deep truth\'97that men were judged in this world rather\
      by what they were than by what they did\'97crept and knocked\
      resentfully at the back doors of his mind.\
\
      \'93I know there was a superstition to that effect,\'94 he muttered.\
\
      \'93One must do him justice now he's dead.\'94\
\
      \'93I should like to have done him justice before,\'94 said Soames;\
      \'93but I never had the chance. Have you got a 'Baronetage' here?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes; in that bottom row.\'94\
\
      Soames took out a fat red book, and ran over the leaves.\
\
      \'93Mont-Sir Lawrence, 9th Bt., cr. 1620, e. s. of Geoffrey, 8th\
      Bt., and Lavinia, daur. of Sir Charles Muskham, Bt., of Muskham\
      Hall, Shrops: marr. 1890 Emily, daur. of Conway Charwell, Esq.,\
      of Condaford Grange, co. Oxon; 1 son, heir Michael Conway, b.\
      1895, 2 daurs. Residence: Lippinghall Manor, Folwell, Bucks.\
      Clubs: Snooks'. Coffee House: Aeroplane. See Bidicott.\'94\
\
      \'93H'm!\'94 he said. \'93Did you ever know a publisher?\'94\
\
      \'93Uncle Timothy.\'94\
\
      \'93Alive, I mean.\'94\
\
      \'93Monty knew one at his Club. He brought him here to dinner once.\
      Monty was always thinking of writing a book, you know, about how\
      to make money on the turf. He tried to interest that man.\'94\
\
      \'93Well?\'94\
\
      \'93He put him on to a horse\'97for the Two Thousand. We didn't see him\
      again. He was rather smart, if I remember.\'94\
\
      \'93Did it win?\'94\
\
      \'93No; it ran last, I think. You know Monty really was quite clever\
      in his way.\'94\
\
      \'93Was he?\'94 said Soames. \'93Can you see any connection between a\
      sucking baronet and publishing?\'94\
\
      \'93People do all sorts of things nowadays,\'94 replied Winifred. \'93The\
      great stunt seems not to be idle\'97so different from our time. To\
      do nothing was the thing then. But I suppose it'll come again.\'94\
\
      \'93This young Mont that I'm speaking of is very sweet on Fleur. If\
      it would put an end to that other affair I might encourage it.\'94\
\
      \'93Has he got style?\'94 asked Winifred.\
\
      \'93He's no beauty; pleasant enough, with some scattered brains.\
      There's a good deal of land, I believe. He seems genuinely\
      attached. But I don't know.\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 murmured Winifred; \'93it's\'97very difficult. I always found it\
      best to do nothing. It is such a bore about Jack; now we shan't\
      get away till after Bank Holiday. Well, the people are always\
      amusing, I shall go into the Park and watch them.\'94\
\
      \'93If I were you,\'94 said Soames, \'93I should have a country cottage,\
      and be out of the way of holidays and strikes when you want.\'94\
\
      \'93The country bores me,\'94 answered Winifred, \'93and I found the\
      railway strike quite exciting.\'94\
\
      Winifred had always been noted for sang-froid.\
\
      Soames took his leave. All the way down to Reading he debated\
      whether he should tell Fleur of that boy's father's death. It did\
      not alter the situation except that he would be independent now,\
      and only have his mother's opposition to encounter. He would come\
      into a lot of money, no doubt, and perhaps the house\'97the house\
      built for Irene and himself\'97the house whose architect had wrought\
      his domestic ruin. His daughter\'97mistress of that house! That\
      would be poetic justice! Soames uttered a little mirthless laugh.\
      He had designed that house to re-establish his failing union,\
      meant it for the seat of his descendants, if he could have\
      induced Irene to give him one! Her son and Fleur! Their children\
      would be, in some sort, offspring of the union between himself\
      and her!\
\
      The theatricality in that thought was repulsive to his sober\
      sense. And yet\'97it would be the easiest and wealthiest way out of\
      the impasse, now that Jolyon was gone. The juncture of two\
      Forsyte fortunes had a kind of conservative charm. And\
      she\'97Irene-would be linked to him once more. Nonsense! Absurd! He\
      put the notion from his head.\
\
      On arriving home he heard the click of billiard-balls, and\
      through the window saw young Mont sprawling over the table.\
      Fleur, with her cue akimbo, was watching with a smile. How pretty\
      she looked! No wonder that young fellow was out of his mind about\
      her. A title\'97land! There was little enough in land, these days;\
      perhaps less in a title. The old Forsytes had always had a kind\
      of contempt for titles, rather remote and artificial things\'97not\
      worth the money they cost, and having to do with the Court. They\
      had all had that feeling in differing measure\'97Soames remembered.\
      Swithin, indeed, in his most expansive days had once attended a\
      Levee. He had come away saying he shouldn't go again\'97\'93all that\
      small fry.\'94 It was suspected that he had looked too big in\
      knee-breeches. Soames remembered how his own mother had wished to\
      be presented because of the fashionable nature of the\
      performance, and how his father had put his foot down with\
      unwonted decision. What did she want with that peacocking\'97wasting\
      time and money; there was nothing in it!\
\
      The instinct which had made and kept the English Commons the\
      chief power in the State, a feeling that their own world was good\
      enough and a little better than any other because it was their\
      world, had kept the old Forsytes singularly free of \'93flummery,\'94\
      as Nicholas had been wont to call it when he had the gout.\
      Soames' generation, more self-conscious and ironical, had been\
      saved by a sense of Swithin in knee-breeches. While the third and\
      the fourth generation, as it seemed to him, laughed at\
      everything.\
\
      However, there was no harm in the young fellow's being heir to a\
      title and estate\'97a thing one couldn't help. He entered quietly,\
      as Mont missed his shot. He noted the young man's eyes, fixed on\
      Fleur bending over in her turn; and the adoration in them almost\
      touched him.\
\
      She paused with the cue poised on the bridge of her slim hand,\
      and shook her crop of short dark chestnut hair.\
\
      \'93I shall never do it.\'94\
\
      \'93'Nothing venture.'\'94\
\
      \'93All right.\'94 The cue struck, the ball rolled. \'93There!\'94\
\
      \'93Bad luck! Never mind!\'94\
\
      Then they saw him, and Soames said:\
\
      \'93I'll mark for you.\'94\
\
      He sat down on the raised seat beneath the marker, trim and\
      tired, furtively studying those two young faces. When the game\
      was over Mont came up to him.\
\
      \'93I've started in, sir. Rum game, business, isn't it? I suppose\
      you saw a lot of human nature as a solicitor.\'94\
\
      \'93I did.\'94\
\
      \'93Shall I tell you what I've noticed: People are quite on the\
      wrong tack in offering less than they can afford to give; they\
      ought to offer more, and work backward.\'94\
\
      Soames raised his eyebrows.\
\
      \'93Suppose the more is accepted?\'94\
\
      \'93That doesn't matter a little bit,\'94 said Mont; \'93it's much more\
      paying to abate a price than to increase it. For instance, say we\
      offer an author good terms\'97he naturally takes them. Then we go\
      into it, find we can't publish at a decent profit and tell him\
      so. He's got confidence in us because we've been generous to him,\
      and he comes down like a lamb, and bears us no malice. But if we\
      offer him poor terms at the start, he doesn't take them, so we\
      have to advance them to get him, and he thinks us damned screws\
      into the bargain.\
\
      \'93Try buying pictures on that system,\'94 said Soames; \'93an offer\
      accepted is a contract\'97haven't you learned that?\'94\
\
      Young Mont turned his head to where Fleur was standing in the\
      window.\
\
      \'93No,\'94 he said, \'93I wish I had. Then there's another thing. Always\
      let a man off a bargain if he wants to be let off.\'94\
\
      \'93As advertisement?\'94 said Soames dryly.\
\
      \'93Of course it is; but I meant on principle.\'94\
\
      \'93Does your firm work on those lines?\'94\
\
      \'93Not yet,\'94 said Mont, \'93but it'll come.\'94\
\
      \'93And they will go.\'94\
\
      \'93No, really, sir. I'm making any number of observations, and they\
      all confirm my theory. Human nature is consistently underrated in\
      business, people do themselves out of an awful lot of pleasure\
      and profit by that. Of course, you must be perfectly genuine and\
      open, but that's easy if you feel it. The more human and generous\
      you are the better chance you've got in business.\'94\
\
      Soames rose.\
\
      \'93Are you a partner?\'94\
\
      \'93Not for six months, yet.\'94\
\
      \'93The rest of the firm had better make haste and retire.\'94\
\
      Mont laughed.\
\
      \'93You'll see,\'94 he said. \'93There's going to be a big change. The\
      possessive principle has got its shutters up.\'94\
\
      \'93What?\'94 said Soames.\
\
      \'93The house is to let! Good-bye, sir; I'm off now.\'94\
\
      Soames watched his daughter give her hand, saw her wince at the\
      squeeze it received, and distinctly heard the young man's sigh as\
      he passed out. Then she came from the window, trailing her finger\
      along the mahogany edge of the billiard-table. Watching her,\
      Soames knew that she was going to ask him something. Her finger\
      felt round the last pocket, and she looked up.\
\
      \'93Have you done anything to stop Jon writing to me, Father?\'94\
\
      Soames shook his head.\
\
      \'93You haven't seen, then?\'94 he said. \'93His father died just a week\
      ago to-day.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94\
\
      In her startled, frowning face he saw the instant struggle to\
      apprehend what this would mean.\
\
      \'93Poor Jon! Why didn't you tell me, Father?\'94\
\
      \'93I never know!\'94 said Soames slowly; \'93you don't confide in me.\'94\
\
      \'93I would, if you'd help me, dear.\'94\
\
      \'93Perhaps I shall.\'94\
\
      Fleur clasped her hands. \'93Oh! darling\'97when one wants a thing\
      fearfully, one doesn't think of other people. Don't be angry with\
      me.\'94\
\
      Soames put out his hand, as if pushing away an aspersion.\
\
      \'93I'm cogitating,\'94 he said. What on earth had made him use a word\
      like that! \'93Has young Mont been bothering you again?\'94\
\
      Fleur smiled. \'93Oh! Michael! He's always bothering; but he's such\
      a good sort\'97I don't mind him.\'94\
\
      \'93Well,\'94 said Soames, \'93I'm tired; I shall go and have a nap before\
      dinner.\'94\
\
      He went up to his picture-gallery, lay down on the couch there,\
      and closed his eyes. A terrible responsibility this girl of\
      his\'97whose mother was\'97ah! what was she? A terrible responsibility!\
      Help her\'97how could he help her? He could not alter the fact that\
      he was her father. Or that Irene\'97! What was it young Mont had\
      said\'97some nonsense about the possessive instinct\'97shutters up\'97To\
      let? Silly!\
\
      The sultry air, charged with a scent of meadow-sweet, of river\
      and roses, closed on his senses, drowsing them.\
\
\
\
\
      V.\'97THE FIXED IDEA\
\
      \'93The fixed idea,\'94 which has outrun more constables than any other\
      form of human disorder, has never more speed and stamina than\
      when it takes the avid guise of love. To hedges and ditches, and\
      doors, to humans without ideas fixed or otherwise, to\
      perambulators and the contents sucking their fixed ideas, even to\
      the other sufferers from this fast malady\'97the fixed idea of love\
      pays no attention. It runs with eyes turned inward to its own\
      light, oblivious of all other stars. Those with the fixed ideas\
      that human happiness depends on their art, on vivisecting dogs,\
      on hating foreigners, on paying supertax, on remaining Ministers,\
      on making wheels go round, on preventing their neighbours from\
      being divorced, on conscientious objection, Greek roots, Church\
      dogma, paradox and superiority to everybody else, with other\
      forms of ego-mania\'97all are unstable compared with him or her\
      whose fixed idea is the possession of some her or him. And though\
      Fleur, those chilly summer days, pursued the scattered life of a\
      little Forsyte whose frocks are paid for, and whose business is\
      pleasure, she was\'97as Winifred would have said in the latest\
      fashion of speech\'97\'93honest to God\'94 indifferent to it all. She\
      wished and wished for the moon, which sailed in cold skies above\
      the river or the Green Park when she went to Town. She even kept\
      Jon's letters, covered with pink silk, on her heart, than which\
      in days when corsets were so low, sentiment so despised, and\
      chests so out of fashion, there could, perhaps, have been no\
      greater proof of the fixity of her idea.\
\
      After hearing of his father's death, she wrote to Jon, and\
      received his answer three days later on her return from a river\
      picnic. It was his first letter since their meeting at June's.\
      She opened it with misgiving, and read it with dismay.\
\
      \'93Since I saw you I've heard everything about the past. I won't\
      tell it you\'97I think you knew when we met at June's. She says you\
      did. If you did, Fleur, you ought to have told me. I expect you\
      only heard your father's side of it. I have heard my mother's.\
      It's dreadful. Now that she's so sad I can't do anything to hurt\
      her more. Of course, I long for you all day, but I don't believe\
      now that we shall ever come together\'97there's something too strong\
      pulling us apart.\'94\
\
      So! Her deception had found her out. But Jon\'97she felt\'97had\
      forgiven that. It was what he said of his mother which caused the\
      guttering in her heart and the weak sensation in her legs.\
\
      Her first impulse was to reply\'97her second, not to reply. These\
      impulses were constantly renewed in the days which followed,\
      while desperation grew within her. She was not her father's child\
      for nothing. The tenacity which had at once made and undone\
      Soames was her backbone, too, frilled and embroidered by French\
      grace and quickness. Instinctively she conjugated the verb \'93to\
      have\'94 always with the pronoun \'93I.\'94 She concealed, however, all\
      signs of her growing desperation, and pursued such river\
      pleasures as the winds and rain of a disagreeable July permitted,\
      as if she had no care in the world; nor did any \'93sucking baronet\'94\
      ever neglect the business of a publisher more consistently than\
      her attendant spirit, Michael Mont.\
\
      To Soames she was a puzzle. He was almost deceived by this\
      careless gaiety. Almost\'97because he did not fail to mark her eyes\
      often fixed on nothing, and the film of light shining from her\
      bedroom window late at night. What was she thinking and brooding\
      over into small hours when she ought to have been asleep? But he\
      dared not ask what was in her mind; and, since that one little\
      talk in the billiard-room, she said nothing to him.\
\
      In this taciturn condition of affairs it chanced that Winifred\
      invited them to lunch and to go afterward to \'93a most amusing\
      little play, 'The Beggar's Opera'\'94 and would they bring a man to\
      make four? Soames, whose attitude toward theatres was to go to\
      nothing, accepted, because Fleur's attitude was to go to\
      everything. They motored up, taking Michael Mont, who, being in\
      his seventh heaven, was found by Winifred \'93very amusing.\'94 \'93The\
      Beggar's Opera\'94 puzzled Soames. The people were very unpleasant,\
      the whole thing very cynical. Winifred was \'93intrigued\'94\'97by the\
      dresses. The music, too, did not displease her. At the Opera, the\
      night before, she had arrived too early for the Russian Ballet,\
      and found the stage occupied by singers, for a whole hour pale or\
      apoplectic from terror lest by some dreadful inadvertence they\
      might drop into a tune. Michael Mont was enraptured with the\
      whole thing. And all three wondered what Fleur was thinking of\
      it. But Fleur was not thinking of it. Her fixed idea stood on the\
      stage and sang with Polly Peachum, mimed with Filch, danced with\
      Jenny Diver, postured with Lucy Lockit, kissed, trolled, and\
      cuddled with Macheath. Her lips might smile, her hands applaud,\
      but the comic old masterpiece made no more impression on her than\
      if it had been pathetic, like a modern \'93Revue.\'94 When they\
      embarked in the car to return, she ached because Jon was not\
      sitting next her instead of Michael Mont. When, at some jolt, the\
      young man's arm touched hers as if by accident, she only thought:\
      'If that were Jon's arm!' When his cheerful voice, tempered by\
      her proximity, murmured above the sound of the car's progress,\
      she smiled and answered, thinking: 'If that were Jon's voice!'\
      and when once he said, \'93Fleur, you look a perfect angel in that\
      dress!\'94 she answered, \'93Oh, do you like it?\'94 thinking, 'If only\
      Jon could see it!'\
\
      During this drive she took a resolution. She would go to Robin\
      Hill and see him\'97alone; she would take the car, without word\
      beforehand to him or to her father. It was nine days since his\
      letter, and she could wait no longer. On Monday she would go! The\
      decision made her well disposed toward young Mont. With something\
      to look forward to she could afford to tolerate and respond. He\
      might stay to dinner; propose to her as usual; dance with her,\
      press her hand, sigh\'97do what he liked. He was only a nuisance\
      when he interfered with her fixed idea. She was even sorry for\
      him so far as it was possible to be sorry for anybody but herself\
      just now. At dinner he seemed to talk more wildly than usual\
      about what he called \'93the death of the close borough\'94\'97she paid\
      little attention, but her father seemed paying a good deal, with\
      the smile on his face which meant opposition, if not anger.\
\
      \'93The younger generation doesn't think as you do, sir; does it,\
      Fleur?\'94\
\
      Fleur shrugged her shoulders\'97the younger generation was just Jon,\
      and she did not know what he was thinking.\
\
      \'93Young people will think as I do when they're my age, Mr. Mont.\
      Human nature doesn't change.\'94\
\
      \'93I admit that, sir; but the forms of thought change with the\
      times. The pursuit of self-interest is a form of thought that's\
      going out.\'94\
\
      \'93Indeed! To mind one's own business is not a form of thought, Mr.\
      Mont, it's an instinct.\'94\
\
      Yes, when Jon was the business!\
\
      \'93But what is one's business, sir? That's the point. Everybody's\
      business is going to be one's business. Isn't it, Fleur?\'94\
\
      Fleur only smiled.\
\
      \'93If not,\'94 added young Mont, \'93there'll be blood.\'94\
\
      \'93People have talked like that from time immemorial\'94\
\
      \'93But you'll admit, sir, that the sense of property is dying out?\'94\
\
      \'93I should say increasing among those who have none.\'94\
\
      \'93Well, look at me! I'm heir to an entailed estate. I don't want\
      the thing; I'd cut the entail to-morrow.\'94\
\
      \'93You're not married, and you don't know what you're talking\
      about.\'94\
\
      Fleur saw the young man's eyes turn rather piteously upon her.\
\
      \'93Do you really mean that marriage\'97?\'94 he began.\
\
      \'93Society is built on marriage,\'94 came from between her father's\
      close lips; \'93marriage and its consequences. Do you want to do\
      away with it?\'94\
\
      Young Mont made a distracted gesture. Silence brooded over the\
      dinner table, covered with spoons bearing the Forsyte crest\'97a\
      pheasant proper\'97under the electric light in an alabaster globe.\
      And outside, the river evening darkened, charged with heavy\
      moisture and sweet scents.\
\
      'Monday,' thought Fleur; 'Monday!'\
\
\
\
\
      VI.\'97DESPERATE\
\
      The weeks which followed the death of his father were sad and\
      empty to the only Jolyon Forsyte left. The necessary forms and\
      ceremonies\'97the reading of the Will, valuation of the estate,\
      distribution of the legacies\'97were enacted over the head, as it\
      were, of one not yet of age. Jolyon was cremated. By his special\
      wish no one attended that ceremony, or wore black for him. The\
      succession of his property, controlled to some extent by old\
      Jolyon's Will, left his widow in possession of Robin Hill, with\
      two thousand five hundred pounds a year for life. Apart from this\
      the two Wills worked together in some complicated way to insure\
      that each of Jolyon's three children should have an equal share\
      in their grandfather's and father's property in the future as in\
      the present, save only that Jon, by virtue of his sex, would have\
      control of his capital when he was twenty-one, while June and\
      Holly would only have the spirit of theirs, in order that their\
      children might have the body after them. If they had no children,\
      it would all come to Jon if he outlived them; and since June was\
      fifty, and Holly nearly forty, it was considered in Lincoln's Inn\
      Fields that but for the cruelty of income tax, young Jon would be\
      as warm a man as his grandfather when he died. All this was\
      nothing to Jon, and little enough to his mother. It was June who\
      did everything needful for one who had left his affairs in\
      perfect order. When she had gone, and those two were alone again\
      in the great house, alone with death drawing them together, and\
      love driving them apart, Jon passed very painful days secretly\
      disgusted and disappointed with himself. His mother would look at\
      him with such a patient sadness which yet had in it an\
      instinctive pride, as if she were reserving her defence. If she\
      smiled he was angry that his answering smile should be so\
      grudging and unnatural. He did not judge or condemn her; that was\
      all too remote\'97indeed, the idea of doing so had never come to\
      him. No! he was grudging and unnatural because he couldn't have\
      what he wanted because of her. There was one alleviation\'97much to\
      do in connection with his father's career, which could not be\
      safely entrusted to June, though she had offered to undertake it.\
      Both Jon and his mother had felt that if she took his portfolios,\
      unexhibited drawings and unfinished matter, away with her, the\
      work would encounter such icy blasts from Paul Post and other\
      frequenters of her studio, that it would soon be frozen out even\
      of her warm heart. On its old-fashioned plane and of its kind the\
      work was good, and they could not bear the thought of its\
      subjection to ridicule. A one-man exhibition of his work was the\
      least testimony they could pay to one they had loved; and on\
      preparation for this they spent many hours together. Jon came to\
      have a curiously increased respect for his father. The quiet\
      tenacity with which he had converted a mediocre talent into\
      something really individual was disclosed by these researches.\
      There was a great mass of work with a rare continuity of growth\
      in depth and reach of vision. Nothing certainly went very deep,\
      or reached very high\'97but such as the work was, it was thorough,\
      conscientious, and complete. And, remembering his father's utter\
      absence of \'93side\'94 or self-assertion, the chaffing humility with\
      which he had always spoken of his own efforts, ever calling\
      himself \'93an amateur,\'94 Jon could not help feeling that he had\
      never really known his father. To take himself seriously, yet\
      never that he did so, seemed to have been his ruling principle.\
      There was something in this which appealed to the boy, and made\
      him heartily endorse his mother's comment: \'93He had true\
      refinement; he couldn't help thinking of others, whatever he did.\
      And when he took a resolution which went counter, he did it with\
      the minimum of defiance\'97not like the Age, is it? Twice in his\
      life he had to go against everything; and yet it never made him\
      bitter.\'94 Jon saw tears running down her face, which she at once\
      turned away from him. She was so quiet about her loss that\
      sometimes he had thought she didn't feel it much. Now, as he\
      looked at her, he felt how far he fell short of the reserve power\
      and dignity in both his father and his mother. And, stealing up\
      to her, he put his arm round her waist. She kissed him swiftly,\
      but with a sort of passion, and went out of the room.\
\
      The studio, where they had been sorting and labelling, had once\
      been Holly's schoolroom, devoted to her silkworms, dried\
      lavender, music, and other forms of instruction. Now, at the end\
      of July, despite its northern and eastern aspects, a warm and\
      slumberous air came in between the long-faded lilac linen\
      curtains. To redeem a little the departed glory, as of a field\
      that is golden and gone, clinging to a room which its master has\
      left, Irene had placed on the paint-stained table a bowl of red\
      roses. This, and Jolyon's favourite cat, who still clung to the\
      deserted habitat, were the pleasant spots in that dishevelled,\
      sad workroom. Jon, at the north window, sniffing air mysteriously\
      scented with warm strawberries, heard a car drive up. The lawyers\
      again about some nonsense! Why did that scent so make one ache?\
      And where did it come from\'97there were no strawberry beds on this\
      side of the house. Instinctively he took a crumpled sheet of\
      paper from his pocket, and wrote down some broken words. A warmth\
      began spreading in his chest; he rubbed the palms of his hands\
      together. Presently he had jotted this:\
\
      \'93If I could make a little song A little song to soothe my heart!\
      I'd make it all of little things The plash of water, rub of\
      wings, The puffing-off of dandies crown, The hiss of raindrop\
      spilling down, The purr of cat, the trill of bird, And ev'ry\
      whispering I've heard From willy wind in leaves and grass, And\
      all the distant drones that pass. A song as tender and as light\
      As flower, or butterfly in flight; And when I saw it opening, I'd\
      let it fly and sing!\'94\
\
      He was still muttering it over to himself at the window, when he\
      heard his name called, and, turning round, saw Fleur. At that\
      amazing apparition, he made at first no movement and no sound,\
      while her clear vivid glance ravished his heart. Then he went\
      forward to the table, saying, \'93How nice of you to come!\'94 and saw\
      her flinch as if he had thrown something at her.\
\
      \'93I asked for you,\'94 she said, \'93and they showed me up here. But I\
      can go away again.\'94\
\
      Jon clutched the paint-stained table. Her face and figure in its\
      frilly frock photographed itself with such startling vividness\
      upon his eyes, that if she had sunk through the floor he must\
      still have seen her.\
\
      \'93I know I told you a lie, Jon. But I told it out of love.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, oh! yes! That's nothing!\'94\
\
      \'93I didn't answer your letter. What was the use\'97there wasn't\
      anything to answer. I wanted to see you instead.\'94 She held out\
      both her hands, and Jon grasped them across the table. He tried\
      to say something, but all his attention was given to trying not\
      to hurt her hands. His own felt so hard and hers so soft. She\
      said almost defiantly:\
\
      \'93That old story\'97was it so very dreadful?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94 In his voice, too, there was a note of defiance.\
\
      She dragged her hands away. \'93I didn't think in these days boys\
      were tied to their mothers' apron-strings.\'94\
\
      Jon's chin went up as if he had been struck.\
\
      \'93Oh! I didn't mean it, Jon. What a horrible thing to say!\'94\
      Swiftly she came close to him. \'93Jon, dear; I didn't mean it.\'94\
\
      \'93All right.\'94\
\
      She had put her two hands on his shoulder, and her forehead down\
      on them; the brim of her hat touched his neck, and he felt it\
      quivering. But, in a sort of paralysis, he made no response. She\
      let go of his shoulder and drew away.\
\
      \'93Well, I'll go, if you don't want me. But I never thought you'd\
      have given me up.\'94\
\
      \'93I haven't,\'94 cried Jon, coming suddenly to life. \'93I can't. I'll\
      try again.\'94\
\
      Her eyes gleamed, she swayed toward him. \'93Jon\'97I love you! Don't\
      give me up! If you do, I don't know what\'97I feel so desperate.\
      What does it matter\'97all that past-compared with this?\'94\
\
      She clung to him. He kissed her eyes, her cheeks, her lips. But\
      while he kissed her he saw, the sheets of that letter fallen down\
      on the floor of his bedroom\'97his father's white dead face\'97his\
      mother kneeling before it. Fleur's whispered, \'93Make her! Promise!\
      Oh! Jon, try!\'94 seemed childish in his ear. He felt curiously old.\
\
      \'93I promise!\'94 he muttered. \'93Only, you don't understand.\'94\
\
      \'93She wants to spoil our lives, just because\'97\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, of what?\'94\
\
      Again that challenge in his voice, and she did not answer. Her\
      arms tightened round him, and he returned her kisses; but even\
      while he yielded, the poison worked in him, the poison of the\
      letter. Fleur did not know, she did not understand\'97she misjudged\
      his mother; she came from the enemy's camp! So lovely, and he\
      loved her so\'97yet, even in her embrace, he could not help the\
      memory of Holly's words: \'93I think she has a 'having' nature,\'94 and\
      his mother's \'93My darling boy, don't think of me\'97think of\
      yourself!\'94\
\
      When she was gone like a passionate dream, leaving her image on\
      his eyes, her kisses on his lips, such an ache in his heart, Jon\
      leaned in the window, listening to the car bearing her away.\
      Still the scent as of warm strawberries, still the little summer\
      sounds that should make his song; still all the promise of youth\
      and happiness in sighing, floating, fluttering July\'97and his heart\
      torn; yearning strong in him; hope high in him yet with its eyes\
      cast down, as if ashamed. The miserable task before him! If Fleur\
      was desperate, so was he\'97watching the poplars swaying, the white\
      clouds passing, the sunlight on the grass.\
\
      He waited till evening, till after their almost silent dinner,\
      till his mother had played to him and still he waited, feeling\
      that she knew what he was waiting to say. She kissed him and went\
      up-stairs, and still he lingered, watching the moonlight and the\
      moths, and that unreality of colouring which steals along and\
      stains a summer night. And he would have given anything to be\
      back again in the past\'97barely three months back; or away forward,\
      years, in the future. The present with this dark cruelty of a\
      decision, one way or the other, seemed impossible. He realised\
      now so much more keenly what his mother felt than he had at\
      first; as if the story in that letter had been a poisonous germ\
      producing a kind of fever of partisanship, so that he really felt\
      there were two camps, his mother's and his\'97Fleur's and her\
      father's. It might be a dead thing, that old tragic ownership and\
      enmity, but dead things were poisonous till time had cleaned them\
      away. Even his love felt tainted, less illusioned, more of the\
      earth, and with a treacherous lurking doubt lest Fleur, like her\
      father, might want to own; not articulate, just a stealing haunt,\
      horribly unworthy, which crept in and about the ardour of his\
      memories, touched with its tarnishing breath the vividness and\
      grace of that charmed face and figure\'97a doubt, not real enough to\
      convince him of its presence, just real enough to deflower a\
      perfect faith. And perfect faith, to Jon, not yet twenty, was\
      essential. He still had Youth's eagerness to give with both\
      hands, to take with neither\'97to give lovingly to one who had his\
      own impulsive generosity. Surely she had! He got up from the\
      window-seat and roamed in the big grey ghostly room, whose walls\
      were hung with silvered canvas. This house his father said in\
      that death-bed letter\'97had been built for his mother to live\
      in\'97with Fleur's father! He put out his hand in the half-dark, as\
      if to grasp the shadowy hand of the dead. He clenched, trying to\
      feel the thin vanished fingers of his father; to squeeze them,\
      and reassure him that he\'97he was on his father's side. Tears,\
      prisoned within him, made his eyes feel dry and hot. He went back\
      to the window. It was warmer, not so eerie, more comforting\
      outside, where the moon hung golden, three days off full; the\
      freedom of the night was comforting. If only Fleur and he had met\
      on some desert island without a past\'97and Nature for their house!\
      Jon had still his high regard for desert islands, where\
      breadfruit grew, and the water was blue above the coral. The\
      night was deep, was free\'97there was enticement in it; a lure, a\
      promise, a refuge from entanglement, and love! Milksop tied to\
      his mother's...! His cheeks burned. He shut the window, drew\
      curtains over it, switched off the lighted sconce, and went\
      up-stairs.\
\
      The door of his room was open, the light turned up; his mother,\
      still in her evening gown, was standing at the window. She turned\
      and said:\
\
      \'93Sit down, Jon; let's talk.\'94 She sat down on the window-seat, Jon\
      on his bed. She had her profile turned to him, and the beauty and\
      grace of her figure, the delicate line of the brow, the nose, the\
      neck, the strange and as it were remote refinement of her, moved\
      him. His mother never belonged to her surroundings. She came into\
      them from somewhere\'97as it were! What was she going to say to him,\
      who had in his heart such things to say to her?\
\
      \'93I know Fleur came to-day. I'm not surprised.\'94 It was as though\
      she had added: \'93She is her father's daughter!\'94 And Jon's heart\
      hardened. Irene went on quietly:\
\
      \'93I have Father's letter. I picked it up that night and kept it.\
      Would you like it back, dear?\'94\
\
      Jon shook his head.\
\
      \'93I had read it, of course, before he gave it to you. It didn't\
      quite do justice to my criminality.\'94\
\
      \'93Mother!\'94 burst from Jon's lips.\
\
      \'93He put it very sweetly, but I know that in marrying Fleur's\
      father without love I did a dreadful thing. An unhappy marriage,\
      Jon, can play such havoc with other lives besides one's own. You\
      are fearfully young, my darling, and fearfully loving. Do you\
      think you can possibly be happy with this girl?\'94\
\
      Staring at her dark eyes, darker now from pain, Jon answered\
\
      \'93Yes; oh! yes\'97if you could be.\'94\
\
      Irene smiled.\
\
      \'93Admiration of beauty and longing for possession are not love. If\
      yours were another case like mine, Jon\'97where the deepest things\
      are stifled; the flesh joined, and the spirit at war!\'94\
\
      \'93Why should it, Mother? You think she must be like her father,\
      but she's not. I've seen him.\'94\
\
      Again the smile came on Irene's lips, and in Jon something\
      wavered; there was such irony and experience in that smile.\
\
      \'93You are a giver, Jon; she is a taker.\'94\
\
      That unworthy doubt, that haunting uncertainty again! He said\
      with vehemence:\
\
      \'93She isn't\'97she isn't. It's only because I can't bear to make you\
      unhappy, Mother, now that Father\'97\'94 He thrust his fists against\
      his forehead.\
\
      Irene got up.\
\
      \'93I told you that night, dear, not to mind me. I meant it. Think\
      of yourself and your own happiness! I can stand what's left\'97I've\
      brought it on myself.\'94\
\
      Again the word \'93Mother!\'94 burst from Jon's lips.\
\
      She came over to him and put her hands over his.\
\
      \'93Do you feel your head, darling?\'94\
\
      Jon shook it. What he felt was in his chest\'97a sort of tearing\
      asunder of the tissue there, by the two loves.\
\
      \'93I shall always love you the same, Jon, whatever you do. You\
      won't lose anything.\'94 She smoothed his hair gently, and walked\
      away.\
\
      He heard the door shut; and, rolling over on the bed, lay,\
      stifling his breath, with an awful held-up feeling within him.\
\
\
\
\
      VII.\'97EMBASSY\
\
      Enquiring for her at tea time Soames learned that Fleur had been\
      out in the car since two. Three hours! Where had she gone? Up to\
      London without a word to him? He had never become quite\
      reconciled with cars. He had embraced them in principle\'97like the\
      born empiricist, or Forsyte, that he was\'97adopting each symptom of\
      progress as it came along with: \'93Well, we couldn't do without\
      them now.\'94 But in fact he found them tearing, great, smelly\
      things. Obliged by Annette to have one\'97a Rollhard with pearl-grey\
      cushions, electric light, little mirrors, trays for the ashes of\
      cigarettes, flower vases\'97all smelling of petrol and\
      stephanotis\'97he regarded it much as he used to regard his\
      brother-in-law, Montague Dartie. The thing typified all that was\
      fast, insecure, and subcutaneously oily in modern life. As modern\
      life became faster, looser, younger, Soames was becoming older,\
      slower, tighter, more and more in thought and language like his\
      father James before him. He was almost aware of it himself. Pace\
      and progress pleased him less and less; there was an ostentation,\
      too, about a car which he considered provocative in the\
      prevailing mood of Labour. On one occasion that fellow Sims had\
      driven over the only vested interest of a working man. Soames had\
      not forgotten the behaviour of its master, when not many people\
      would have stopped to put up with it. He had been sorry for the\
      dog, and quite prepared to take its part against the car, if that\
      ruffian hadn't been so outrageous. With four hours fast becoming\
      five, and still no Fleur, all the old car-wise feelings he had\
      experienced in person and by proxy balled within him, and sinking\
      sensations troubled the pit of his stomach. At seven he\
      telephoned to Winifred by trunk call. No! Fleur had not been to\
      Green Street. Then where was she? Visions of his beloved daughter\
      rolled up in her pretty frills, all blood and dust-stained, in\
      some hideous catastrophe, began to haunt him. He went to her room\
      and spied among her things. She had taken nothing\'97no\
      dressing-case, no Jewellery. And this, a relief in one sense,\
      increased his fears of an accident. Terrible to be helpless when\
      his loved one was missing, especially when he couldn't bear fuss\
      or publicity of any kind! What should he do if she were not back\
      by nightfall?\
\
      At a quarter to eight he heard the car. A great weight lifted\
      from off his heart; he hurried down. She was getting out\'97pale and\
      tired-looking, but nothing wrong. He met her in the hall.\
\
      \'93You've frightened me. Where have you been?\'94\
\
      \'93To Robin Hill. I'm sorry, dear. I had to go; I'll tell you\
      afterward.\'94 And, with a flying kiss, she ran up-stairs.\
\
      Soames waited in the drawing-room. To Robin Hill! What did that\
      portend?\
\
      It was not a subject they could discuss at dinner\'97consecrated to\
      the susceptibilities of the butler. The agony of nerves Soames\
      had been through, the relief he felt at her safety, softened his\
      power to condemn what she had done, or resist what she was going\
      to do; he waited in a relaxed stupor for her revelation. Life was\
      a queer business. There he was at sixty-five and no more in\
      command of things than if he had not spent forty years in\
      building up security-always something one couldn't get on terms\
      with! In the pocket of his dinner-jacket was a letter from\
      Annette. She was coming back in a fortnight. He knew nothing of\
      what she had been doing out there. And he was glad that he did\
      not. Her absence had been a relief. Out of sight was out of mind!\
      And now she was coming back. Another worry! And the Bolderby Old\
      Crome was gone\'97Dumetrius had got it\'97all because that anonymous\
      letter had put it out of his thoughts. He furtively remarked the\
      strained look on his daughter's face, as if she too were gazing\
      at a picture that she couldn't buy. He almost wished the War\
      back. Worries didn't seem, then, quite so worrying. From the\
      caress in her voice, the look on her face, he became certain that\
      she wanted something from him, uncertain whether it would be wise\
      of him to give it her. He pushed his savoury away uneaten, and\
      even joined her in a cigarette.\
\
      After dinner she set the electric piano-player going. And he\
      augured the worst when she sat down on a cushion footstool at his\
      knee, and put her hand on his.\
\
      \'93Darling, be nice to me. I had to see Jon\'97he wrote to me. He's\
      going to try what he can do with his mother. But I've been\
      thinking. It's really in your hands, Father. If you'd persuade\
      her that it doesn't mean renewing the past in any way! That I\
      shall stay yours, and Jon will stay hers; that you need never see\
      him or her, and she need never see you or me! Only you could\
      persuade her, dear, because only you could promise. One can't\
      promise for other people. Surely it wouldn't be too awkward for\
      you to see her just this once now that Jon's father is dead?\'94\
\
      \'93Too awkward?\'94 Soames repeated. \'93The whole thing's preposterous.\'94\
\
      \'93You know,\'94 said Fleur, without looking up, \'93you wouldn't mind\
      seeing her, really.\'94\
\
      Soames was silent. Her words had expressed a truth too deep for\
      him to admit. She slipped her fingers between his own\'97hot, slim,\
      eager, they clung there. This child of his would corkscrew her\
      way into a brick wall!\
\
      \'93What am I to do if you won't, Father?\'94 she said very softly.\
\
      \'93I'll do anything for your happiness,\'94 said Soanies; \'93but this\
      isn't for your happiness.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! it is; it is!\'94\
\
      \'93It'll only stir things up,\'94 he said grimly.\
\
      \'93But they are stirred up. The thing is to quiet them. To make her\
      feel that this is just our lives, and has nothing to do with\
      yours or hers. You can do it, Father, I know you can.\'94\
\
      \'93You know a great deal, then,\'94 was Soames' glum answer.\
\
      \'93If you will, Jon and I will wait a year\'97two years if you like.\'94\
\
      \'93It seems to me,\'94 murmured Soames, \'93that you care nothing about\
      what I feel.\'94\
\
      Fleur pressed his hand against her cheek.\
\
      \'93I do, darling. But you wouldn't like me to be awfully\
      miserable.\'94\
\
      How she wheedled to get her ends! And trying with all his might\
      to think she really cared for him\'97he was not sure\'97not sure. All\
      she cared for was this boy! Why should he help her to get this\
      boy, who was killing her affection for himself? Why should he? By\
      the laws of the Forsytes it was foolish! There was nothing to be\
      had out of it\'97nothing! To give her to that boy! To pass her into\
      the enemy's camp, under the influence of the woman who had\
      injured him so deeply! Slowly\'97inevitably\'97he would lose this\
      flower of his life! And suddenly he was conscious that his hand\
      was wet. His heart gave a little painful jump. He couldn't bear\
      her to cry. He put his other hand quickly over hers, and a tear\
      dropped on that, too. He couldn't go on like this! \'93Well, well,\'94\
      he said, \'93I'll think it over, and do what I can. Come, come!\'94 If\
      she must have it for her happiness\'97she must; he couldn't refuse\
      to help her. And lest she should begin to thank him he got out of\
      his chair and went up to the piano-player\'97making that noise! It\
      ran down, as he reached it, with a faint buzz. That musical box\
      of his nursery days: \'93The Harmonious Blacksmith,\'94 \'93Glorious\
      Port\'94\'97the thing had always made him miserable when his mother set\
      it going on Sunday afternoons. Here it was again\'97the same thing,\
      only larger, more expensive, and now it played \'93The Wild, Wild\
      Women,\'94 and \'93The Policeman's Holiday,\'94 and he was no longer in\
      black velvet with a sky blue collar. 'Profond's right,' he\
      thought, 'there's nothing in it! We're all progressing to the\
      grave!' And with that surprising mental comment he walked out.\
\
      He did not see Fleur again that night. But, at breakfast, her\
      eyes followed him about with an appeal he could not escape\'97not\
      that he intended to try. No! He had made up his mind to the\
      nerve-racking business. He would go to Robin Hill\'97to that house\
      of memories. Pleasant memory\'97the last! Of going down to keep that\
      boy's father and Irene apart by threatening divorce. He had often\
      thought, since, that it had clinched their union. And, now, he\
      was going to clinch the union of that boy with his girl. 'I don't\
      know what I've done,' he thought, 'to have such things thrust on\
      me!' He went up by train and down by train, and from the station\
      walked by the long rising lane, still very much as he remembered\
      it over thirty years ago. Funny\'97so near London! Some one\
      evidently was holding on to the land there. This speculation\
      soothed him, moving between the high hedges slowly, so as not to\
      get overheated, though the day was chill enough. After all was\
      said and done there was something real about land, it didn't\
      shift. Land, and good pictures! The values might fluctuate a bit,\
      but on the whole they were always going up\'97worth holding on to,\
      in a world where there was such a lot of unreality, cheap\
      building, changing fashions, such a \'93Here to-day and gone\
      to-morrow\'94 spirit. The French were right, perhaps, with their\
      peasant proprietorship, though he had no opinion of the French.\
      One's bit of land! Something solid in it! He had heard peasant\
      proprietors described as a pig-headed lot; had heard young Mont\
      call his father a pigheaded Morning Poster\'97disrespectful young\
      devil. Well, there were worse things than being pig-headed or\
      reading the Morning Post. There was Profond and his tribe, and\
      all these Labour chaps, and loud-mouthed politicians and 'wild,\
      wild women'. A lot of worse things! And suddenly Soames became\
      conscious of feeling weak, and hot, and shaky. Sheer nerves at\
      the meeting before him! As Aunt Juley might have said\'97quoting\
      \'93Superior Dosset\'94\'97his nerves were \'93in a proper fautigue.\'94 He\
      could see the house now among its trees, the house he had watched\
      being built, intending it for himself and this woman, who, by\
      such strange fate, had lived in it with another after all! He\
      began to think of Dumetrius, Local Loans, and other forms of\
      investment. He could not afford to meet her with his nerves all\
      shaking; he who represented the Day of Judgment for her on earth\
      as it was in heaven; he, legal ownership, personified, meeting\
      lawless beauty, incarnate. His dignity demanded impassivity\
      during this embassy designed to link their offspring, who, if she\
      had behaved herself, would have been brother and sister. That\
      wretched tune, \'93The Wild, Wild Women,\'94 kept running in his head,\
      perversely, for tunes did not run there as a rule. Passing the\
      poplars in front of the house, he thought: 'How they've grown; I\
      had them planted!' A maid answered his ring.\
\
      \'93Will you say\'97Mr. Forsyte, on a very special matter.\'94\
\
      If she realised who he was, quite probably she would not see him.\
      'By George!' he thought, hardening as the tug came. 'It's a\
      topsy-turvy affair!'\
\
      The maid came back. \'93Would the gentleman state his business,\
      please?\'94\
\
      \'93Say it concerns Mr. Jon,\'94 said Soames.\
\
      And once more he was alone in that hall with the pool of\
      grey-white marble designed by her first lover. Ah! she had been a\
      bad lot\'97had loved two men, and not himself! He must remember that\
      when he came face to face with her once more. And suddenly he saw\
      her in the opening chink between the long heavy purple curtains,\
      swaying, as if in hesitation; the old perfect poise and line, the\
      old startled dark-eyed gravity, the old calm defensive voice:\
      \'93Will you come in, please?\'94\
\
      He passed through that opening. As in the picture-gallery and the\
      confectioner's shop, she seemed to him still beautiful. And this\
      was the first time\'97the very first\'97since he married her\
      seven-and-thirty years ago, that he was speaking to her without\
      the legal right to call her his. She was not wearing black\'97one of\
      that fellow's radical notions, he supposed.\
\
      \'93I apologise for coming,\'94 he said glumly; \'93but this business must\
      be settled one way or the other.\'94\
\
      \'93Won't you sit down?\'94\
\
      \'93No, thank you.\'94\
\
      Anger at his false position, impatience of ceremony between them,\
      mastered him, and words came tumbling out:\
\
      \'93It's an infernal mischance; I've done my best to discourage it.\
      I consider my daughter crazy, but I've got into the habit of\
      indulging her; that's why I'm here. I suppose you're fond of your\
      son.\'94\
\
      \'93Devotedly.\'94\
\
      \'93Well?\'94\
\
      \'93It rests with him.\'94\
\
      He had a sense of being met and baffled. Always\'97always she had\
      baffled him, even in those old first married days.\
\
      \'93It's a mad notion,\'94 he said.\
\
      \'93It is.\'94\
\
      \'93If you had only\'97! Well\'97they might have been\'97\'94 he did not finish\
      that sentence \'93brother and sister and all this saved,\'94 but he saw\
      her shudder as if he had, and stung by the sight he crossed over\
      to the window. Out there the trees had not grown\'97they couldn't,\
      they were old!\
\
      \'93So far as I'm concerned,\'94 he said, \'93you may make your mind easy.\
      I desire to see neither you nor your son if this marriage comes\
      about. Young people in these days are\'97are unaccountable. But I\
      can't bear to see my daughter unhappy. What am I to say to her\
      when I go back?\'94\
\
      \'93Please say to her as I said to you, that it rests with Jon.\'94\
\
      \'93You don't oppose it?\'94\
\
      \'93With all my heart; not with my lips.\'94\
\
      Soames stood, biting his finger.\
\
      \'93I remember an evening\'97\'94 he said suddenly; and was silent. What\
      was there\'97what was there in this woman that would not fit into\
      the four corners of his hate or condemnation? \'93Where is he\'97your\
      son?\'94\
\
      \'93Up in his father's studio, I think.\'94\
\
      \'93Perhaps you'd have him down.\'94\
\
      He watched her ring the bell, he watched the maid come in.\
\
      \'93Please tell Mr. Jon that I want him.\'94\
\
      \'93If it rests with him,\'94 said Soames hurriedly, when the maid was\
      gone, \'93I suppose I may take it for granted that this unnatural\
      marriage will take place; in that case there'll be formalities.\
      Whom do I deal with\'97Herring's?\'94\
\
      Irene nodded.\
\
      \'93You don't propose to live with them?\'94\
\
      Irene shook her head.\
\
      \'93What happens to this house?\'94\
\
      \'93It will be as Jon wishes.\'94\
\
      \'93This house,\'94 said Soames suddenly: \'93I had hopes when I began it.\
      If they live in it\'97their children! They say there's such a thing\
      as Nemesis. Do you believe in it?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh! You do!\'94\
\
      He had come back from the window, and was standing close to her,\
      who, in the curve of her grand piano, was, as it were, embayed.\
\
      \'93I'm not likely to see you again,\'94 he said slowly. \'93Will you\
      shake hands\'94\'97his lip quivered, the words came out jerkily\'97\'93and\
      let the past die.\'94 He held out his hand. Her pale face grew\
      paler, her eyes so dark, rested immovably on his, her hands\
      remained clasped in front of her. He heard a sound and turned.\
      That boy was standing in the opening of the curtains. Very queer\
      he looked, hardly recognisable as the young fellow he had seen in\
      the Gallery off Cork Street\'97very queer; much older, no youth in\
      the face at all\'97haggard, rigid, his hair ruffled, his eyes deep\
      in his head. Soames made an effort, and said with a lift of his\
      lip, not quite a smile nor quite a sneer:\
\
      \'93Well, young man! I'm here for my daughter; it rests with you, it\
      seems\'97this matter. Your mother leaves it in your hands.\'94\
\
      The boy continued staring at his mother's face, and made no\
      answer.\
\
      \'93For my daughter's sake I've brought myself to come,\'94 said\
      Soames. \'93What am I to say to her when I go back?\'94\
\
      Still looking at his mother, the boy said, quietly:\
\
      \'93Tell Fleur that it's no good, please; I must do as my father\
      wished before he died.\'94\
\
      \'93Jon!\'94\
\
      \'93It's all right, Mother.\'94\
\
      In a kind of stupefaction Soames looked from one to the other;\
      then, taking up hat and umbrella which he had put down on a\
      chair, he walked toward the curtains. The boy stood aside for him\
      to go by. He passed through and heard the grate of the rings as\
      the curtains were drawn behind him. The sound liberated something\
      in his chest.\
\
      'So that's that!' he thought, and passed out of the front door.\
\
\
\
\
      VIII.\'97THE DARK TUNE\
\
      As Soames walked away from the house at Robin Hill the sun broke\
      through the grey of that chill afternoon, in smoky radiance. So\
      absorbed in landscape painting that he seldom looked seriously\
      for effects of Nature out of doors\'97he was struck by that moody\
      effulgence\'97it mourned with a triumph suited to his own feeling.\
      Victory in defeat. His embassy had come to naught. But he was rid\
      of those people, had regained his daughter at the expense of\'97her\
      happiness. What would Fleur say to him? Would she believe he had\
      done his best? And under that sunlight faring on the elms,\
      hazels, hollies of the lane and those unexploited fields, Soames\
      felt dread. She would be terribly upset! He must appeal to her\
      pride. That boy had given her up, declared part and lot with the\
      woman who so long ago had given her father up! Soames clenched\
      his hands. Given him up, and why? What had been wrong with him?\
      And once more he felt the malaise of one who contemplates himself\
      as seen by another\'97like a dog who chances on his refection in a\
      mirror and is intrigued and anxious at the unseizable thing.\
\
      Not in a hurry to get home, he dined in town at the Connoisseurs.\
      While eating a pear it suddenly occurred to him that, if he had\
      not gone down to Robin Hill, the boy might not have so decided.\
      He remembered the expression on his face while his mother was\
      refusing the hand he had held out. A strange, an awkward thought!\
      Had Fleur cooked her own goose by trying to make too sure?\
\
      He reached home at half-past nine. While the car was passing in\
      at one drive gate he heard the grinding sputter of a motor-cycle\
      passing out by the other. Young Mont, no doubt, so Fleur had not\
      been lonely. But he went in with a sinking heart. In the\
      cream-panelled drawing-room she was sitting with her elbows on\
      her knees, and her chin on her clasped hands, in front of a white\
      camellia plant which filled the fireplace. That glance at her\
      before she saw him renewed his dread. What was she seeing among\
      those white camellias?\
\
      \'93Well, Father!\'94\
\
      Soames shook his head. His tongue failed him. This was murderous\
      work! He saw her eyes dilate, her lips quivering.\
\
      \'93What? What? Quick, Father!\'94\
\
      \'93My dear,\'94 said Soames, \'93I\'97I did my best, but\'97\'94 And again he\
      shook his head.\
\
      Fleur ran to him, and put a hand on each of his shoulders.\
\
      \'93She?\'94\
\
      \'93No,\'94 muttered Soames; \'93he. I was to tell you that it was no use;\
      he must do what his father wished before he died.\'94 He caught her\
      by the waist. \'93Come, child, don't let them hurt you. They're not\
      worth your little finger.\'94\
\
      Fleur tore herself from his grasp.\
\
      \'93You didn't you\'97couldn't have tried. You\'97you betrayed me,\
      Father!\'94\
\
      Bitterly wounded, Soames gazed at her passionate figure writhing\
      there in front of him.\
\
      \'93You didn't try\'97you didn't\'97I was a fool! I won't believe he\
      could\'97he ever could! Only yesterday he\'97! Oh! why did I ask you?\'94\
\
      \'93Yes,\'94 said Soames, quietly, \'93why did you? I swallowed my\
      feelings; I did my best for you, against my judgment\'97and this is\
      my reward. Good-night!\'94\
\
      With every nerve in his body twitching he went toward the door.\
\
      Fleur darted after him.\
\
      \'93He gives me up? You mean that? Father!\'94\
\
      Soames turned and forced himself to answer:\
\
      \'93Yes.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 cried Fleur. \'93What did you\'97what could you have done in\
      those old days?\'94\
\
      The breathless sense of really monstrous injustice cut the power\
      of speech in Soames' throat. What had he done! What had they done\
      to him!\
\
      And with quite unconscious dignity he put his hand on his breast,\
      and looked at her.\
\
      \'93It's a shame!\'94 cried Fleur passionately.\
\
      Soames went out. He mounted, slow and icy, to his picture\
      gallery, and paced among his treasures. Outrageous! Oh!\
      Outrageous! She was spoiled! Ah! and who had spoiled her? He\
      stood still before the Goya copy. Accustomed to her own way in\
      everything. Flower of his life! And now that she couldn't have\
      it! He turned to the window for some air. Daylight was dying, the\
      moon rising, gold behind the poplars! What sound was that? Why!\
      That piano thing! A dark tune, with a thrum and a throb! She had\
      set it going\'97what comfort could she get from that? His eyes\
      caught movement down there beyond the lawn, under the trellis of\
      rambler roses and young acacia-trees, where the moonlight fell.\
      There she was, roaming up and down. His heart gave a little\
      sickening jump. What would she do under this blow? How could he\
      tell? What did he know of her\'97he had only loved her all his\
      life\'97looked on her as the apple of his eye! He knew nothing\'97had\
      no notion. There she was\'97and that dark tune\'97and the river\
      gleaming in the moonlight!\
\
      'I must go out,' he thought.\
\
      He hastened down to the drawing-room, lighted just as he had left\
      it, with the piano thrumming out that waltz, or fox-trot, or\
      whatever they called it in these days, and passed through on to\
      the verandah.\
\
      Where could he watch, without her seeing him? And he stole down\
      through the fruit garden to the boat-house. He was between her\
      and the river now, and his heart felt lighter. She was his\
      daughter, and Annette's\'97she wouldn't do anything foolish; but\
      there it was\'97he didn't know! From the boat house window he could\
      see the last acacia and the spin of her skirt when she turned in\
      her restless march. That tune had run down at last\'97thank\
      goodness! He crossed the floor and looked through the farther\
      window at the water slow-flowing past the lilies. It made little\
      bubbles against them, bright where a moon-streak fell. He\
      remembered suddenly that early morning when he had slept on the\
      house-boat after his father died, and she had just been\
      born\'97nearly nineteen years ago! Even now he recalled the\
      unaccustomed world when he woke up, the strange feeling it had\
      given him. That day the second passion of his life began\'97for this\
      girl of his, roaming under the acacias. What a comfort she had\
      been to him! And all the soreness and sense of outrage left him.\
      If he could make her happy again, he didn't care! An owl flew,\
      queeking, queeking; a bat flitted by; the moonlight brightened\
      and broadened on the water. How long was she going to roam about\
      like this! He went back to the window, and suddenly saw her\
      coming down to the bank. She stood quite close, on the\
      landing-stage. And Soames watched, clenching his hands. Should he\
      speak to her? His excitement was intense. The stillness of her\
      figure, its youth, its absorption in despair, in longing,\
      in\'97itself. He would always remember it, moonlit like that; and\
      the faint sweet reek of the river and the shivering of the willow\
      leaves. She had everything in the world that he could give her,\
      except the one thing that she could not have because of him! The\
      perversity of things hurt him at that moment, as might a\
      fish-bone in his throat.\
\
      Then, with an infinite relief, he saw her turn back toward the\
      house. What could he give her to make amends? Pearls, travel,\
      horses, other young men\'97anything she wanted\'97that he might lose\
      the memory of her young figure lonely by the water! There! She\
      had set that tune going again! Why\'97it was a mania! Dark,\
      thrumming, faint, travelling from the house. It was as though she\
      had said: \'93If I can't have something to keep me going, I shall\
      die of this!\'94 Soames dimly understood. Well, if it helped her,\
      let her keep it thrumming on all night! And, mousing back through\
      the fruit garden, he regained the verandah. Though he meant to go\
      in and speak to her now, he still hesitated, not knowing what to\
      say, trying hard to recall how it felt to be thwarted in love. He\
      ought to know, ought to remember\'97and he could not! Gone\'97all real\
      recollection; except that it had hurt him horribly. In this\
      blankness he stood passing his handkerchief over hands and lips,\
      which were very dry. By craning his head he could just see Fleur,\
      standing with her back to that piano still grinding out its tune,\
      her arms tight crossed on her breast, a lighted cigarette between\
      her lips, whose smoke half veiled her face. The expression on it\
      was strange to Soames, the eyes shone and stared, and every\
      feature was alive with a sort of wretched scorn and anger. Once\
      or twice he had seen Annette look like that\'97the face was too\
      vivid, too naked, not his daughter's at that moment. And he dared\
      not go in, realising the futility of any attempt at consolation.\
      He sat down in the shadow of the ingle-nook.\
\
      Monstrous trick, that Fate had played him! Nemesis! That old\
      unhappy marriage! And in God's name-why? How was he to know, when\
      he wanted Irene so violently, and she consented to be his, that\
      she would never love him? The tune died and was renewed, and died\
      again, and still Soames sat in the shadow, waiting for he knew\
      not what. The fag of Fleur's cigarette, flung through the window,\
      fell on the grass; he watched it glowing, burning itself out. The\
      moon had freed herself above the poplars, and poured her\
      unreality on the garden. Comfortless light, mysterious,\
      withdrawn\'97like the beauty of that woman who had never loved\
      him\'97dappling the nemesias and the stocks with a vesture not of\
      earth. Flowers! And his flower so unhappy! Ah! Why could one not\
      put happiness into Local Loans, gild its edges, insure it against\
      going down?\
\
      Light had ceased to flow out now from the drawing-room window.\
      All was silent and dark in there. Had she gone up? He rose, and,\
      tiptoeing, peered in. It seemed so! He entered. The verandah kept\
      the moonlight out; and at first he could see nothing but the\
      outlines of furniture blacker than the darkness. He groped toward\
      the farther window to shut it. His foot struck a chair, and he\
      heard a gasp. There she was, curled and crushed into the corner\
      of the sofa! His hand hovered. Did she want his consolation? He\
      stood, gazing at that ball of crushed frills and hair and\
      graceful youth, trying to burrow its way out of sorrow. How leave\
      her there? At last he touched her hair, and said:\
\
      \'93Come, darling, better go to bed. I'll make it up to you,\
      somehow.\'94 How fatuous! But what could he have said?\
\
\
\
\
      IX.\'97UNDER THE OAK-TREE\
\
      When their visitor had disappeared Jon and his mother stood\
      without speaking, till he said suddenly:\
\
      \'93I ought to have seen him out.\'94\
\
      But Soames was already walking down the drive, and Jon went\
      upstairs to his father's studio, not trusting himself to go back.\
\
      The expression on his mother's face confronting the man she had\
      once been married to, had sealed a resolution growing within him\
      ever since she left him the night before. It had put the\
      finishing touch of reality. To marry Fleur would be to hit his\
      mother in the face; to betray his dead father! It was no good!\
      Jon had the least resentful of natures. He bore his parents no\
      grudge in this hour of his distress. For one so young there was a\
      rather strange power in him of seeing things in some sort of\
      proportion. It was worse for Fleur, worse for his mother even,\
      than it was for him. Harder than to give up was to be given up,\
      or to be the cause of some one you loved giving up for you. He\
      must not, would not behave grudgingly! While he stood watching\
      the tardy sunlight, he had again that sudden vision of the world\
      which had come to him the night before. Sea on sea, country on\
      country, millions on millions of people, all with their own\
      lives, energies, joys, griefs, and suffering\'97all with things they\
      had to give up, and separate struggles for existence. Even though\
      he might be willing to give up all else for the one thing he\
      couldn't have, he would be a fool to think his feelings mattered\
      much in so vast a world, and to behave like a cry-baby or a cad.\
      He pictured the people who had nothing\'97the millions who had given\
      up life in the War, the millions whom the War had left with life\
      and little else; the hungry children he had read of, the\
      shattered men; people in prison, every kind of unfortunate.\
      And\'97they did not help him much. If one had to miss a meal, what\
      comfort in the knowledge that many others had to miss it too?\
      There was more distraction in the thought of getting away out\
      into this vast world of which he knew nothing yet. He could not\
      go on staying here, walled in and sheltered, with everything so\
      slick and comfortable, and nothing to do but brood and think what\
      might have been. He could not go back to Wansdon, and the\
      memories of Fleur. If he saw her again he could not trust\
      himself; and if he stayed here or went back there, he would\
      surely see her. While they were within reach of each other that\
      must happen. To go far away and quickly was the only thing to do.\
      But, however much he loved his mother, he did not want to go away\
      with her. Then feeling that was brutal, he made up his mind\
      desperately to propose that they should go to Italy. For two\
      hours in that melancholy room he tried to master himself, then\
      dressed solemnly for dinner.\
\
      His mother had done the same. They ate little, at some length,\
      and talked of his father's catalogue. The show was arranged for\
      October, and beyond clerical detail there was nothing more to do.\
\
      After dinner she put on a cloak and they went out; walked a\
      little, talked a little, till they were standing silent at last\
      beneath the oak-tree. Ruled by the thought: 'If I show anything,\
      I show all,' Jon put his arm through hers and said quite\
      casually:\
\
      \'93Mother, let's go to Italy.\'94\
\
      Irene pressed his arm, and said as casually:\
\
      \'93It would be very nice; but I've been thinking you ought to see\
      and do more than you would if I were with you.\'94\
\
      \'93But then you'd be alone.\'94\
\
      \'93I was once alone for more than twelve years. Besides, I should\
      like to be here for the opening of Father's show.\'94\
\
      Jon's grip tightened round her arm; he was not deceived.\
\
      \'93You couldn't stay here all by yourself; it's too big.\'94\
\
      \'93Not here, perhaps. In London, and I might go to Paris, after the\
      show opens. You ought to have a year at least, Jon, and see the\
      world.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes, I'd like to see the world and rough it. But I don't want to\
      leave you all alone.\'94\
\
      \'93My dear, I owe you that at least. If it's for your good, it'll\
      be for mine. Why not start tomorrow? You've got your passport.\'94\
\
      \'93Yes; if I'm going it had better be at once. Only\'97Mother\'97if\'97if I\
      wanted to stay out somewhere\'97America or anywhere, would you mind\
      coming presently?\'94\
\
      \'93Wherever and whenever you send for me. But don't send until you\
      really want me.\'94\
\
      Jon drew a deep breath.\
\
      \'93I feel England's choky.\'94\
\
      They stood a few minutes longer under the oak-tree\'97looking out to\
      where the grand stand at Epsom was veiled in evening. The\
      branches kept the moonlight from them, so that it only fell\
      everywhere else\'97over the fields and far away, and on the windows\
      of the creepered house behind, which soon would be to let.\
\
\
\
\
      X.\'97FLEUR'S WEDDING\
\
      The October paragraphs describing the wedding of Fleur Forsyte to\
      Michael Mont hardly conveyed the symbolic significance of this\
      event. In the union of the great-granddaughter of \'93Superior\
      Dosset\'94 with the heir of a ninth baronet was the outward and\
      visible sign of that merger of class in class which buttresses\
      the political stability of a realm. The time had come when the\
      Forsytes might resign their natural resentment against a\
      \'93flummery\'94 not theirs by birth, and accept it as the still more\
      natural due of their possessive instincts. Besides, they had to\
      mount to make room for all those so much more newly rich. In that\
      quiet but tasteful ceremony in Hanover Square, and afterward\
      among the furniture in Green Street, it had been impossible for\
      those not in the know to distinguish the Forsyte troop from the\
      Mont contingent\'97so far away was \'93Superior Dosset\'94 now. Was there,\
      in the crease of his trousers, the expression of his moustache,\
      his accent, or the shine on his top-hat, a pin to choose between\
      Soames and the ninth baronet himself? Was not Fleur as\
      self-possessed, quick, glancing, pretty, and hard as the\
      likeliest Muskham, Mont, or Charwell filly present? If anything,\
      the Forsytes had it in dress and looks and manners. They had\
      become \'93upper class\'94 and now their name would be formally\
      recorded in the Stud Book, their money joined to land. Whether\
      this was a little late in the day, and those rewards of the\
      possessive instinct, lands and money, destined for the\
      melting-pot\'97was still a question so moot that it was not mooted.\
      After all, Timothy had said Consols were goin' up. Timothy, the\
      last, the missing link; Timothy, in extremis on the Bayswater\
      Road\'97so Francie had reported. It was whispered, too, that this\
      young Mont was a sort of socialist\'97strangely wise of him, and in\
      the nature of insurance, considering the days they lived in.\
      There was no uneasiness on that score. The landed classes\
      produced that sort of amiable foolishness at times, turned to\
      safe uses and confined to theory. As George remarked to his\
      sister Francie: \'93They'll soon be having puppies\'97that'll give him\
      pause.\'94\
\
      The church with white flowers and something blue in the middle of\
      the East window looked extremely chaste, as though endeavouring\
      to counteract the somewhat lurid phraseology of a Service\
      calculated to keep the thoughts of all on puppies. Forsytes,\
      Haymans, Tweetymans, sat in the left aisle; Monts, Charwells;\
      Muskhams in the right; while a sprinkling of Fleur's\
      fellow-sufferers at school, and of Mont's fellow-sufferers in,\
      the War, gaped indiscriminately from either side, and three\
      maiden ladies, who had dropped in on their way from Skyward's\
      brought up the rear, together with two Mont retainers and Fleur's\
      old nurse. In the unsettled state of the country as full a house\
      as could be expected.\
\
      Mrs. Val Dartie, who sat with her husband in the third row,\
      squeezed his hand more than once during the performance. To her,\
      who knew the plot of this tragi-comedy, its most dramatic moment\
      was well-nigh painful. 'I wonder if Jon knows by instinct,' she\
      thought\'97Jon, out in British Columbia. She had received a letter\
      from him only that morning which had made her smile and say:\
\
      \'93Jon's in British Columbia, Val, because he wants to be in\
      California. He thinks it's too nice there.\'94\
\
      \'93Oh!\'94 said Val, \'93so he's beginning to see a joke again.\'94\
\
      \'93He's bought some land and sent for his mother.\'94\
\
      \'93What on earth will she do out there?\'94\
\
      \'93All she cares about is Jon. Do you still think it a happy\
      release?\'94\
\
      Val's shrewd eyes narrowed to grey pin-points between their dark\
      lashes.\
\
      \'93Fleur wouldn't have suited him a bit. She's not bred right.\'94\
\
      \'93Poor little Fleur!\'94 sighed Holly. Ah! it was strange\'97this\
      marriage. The young man, Mont, had caught her on the rebound, of\
      course, in the reckless mood of one whose ship has just gone\
      down. Such a plunge could not but be\'97as Val put it\'97an outside\
      chance. There was little to be told from the back view of her\
      young cousin's veil, and Holly's eyes reviewed the general aspect\
      of this Christian wedding. She, who had made a love-match which\
      had been successful, had a horror of unhappy marriages. This\
      might not be one in the end\'97but it was clearly a toss-up; and to\
      consecrate a toss-up in this fashion with manufactured unction\
      before a crowd of fashionable free-thinkers\'97for who thought\
      otherwise than freely, or not at all, when they were \'93dolled\'94\
      up\'97seemed to her as near a sin as one could find in an age which\
      had abolished them. Her eyes wandered from the prelate in his\
      robes (a Charwell-the Forsytes had not as yet produced a prelate)\
      to Val, beside her, thinking\'97she was certain\'97of the Mayfly filly\
      at fifteen to one for the Cambridgeshire. They passed on and\
      caught the profile of the ninth baronet, in counterfeitment of\
      the kneeling process. She could just see the neat ruck above his\
      knees where he had pulled his trousers up, and thought: 'Val's\
      forgotten to pull up his!' Her eyes passed to the pew in front of\
      her, where Winifred's substantial form was gowned with passion,\
      and on again to Soames and Annette kneeling side by side. A\
      little smile came on her lips\'97Prosper Profond, back from the\
      South Seas of the Channel, would be kneeling too, about six rows\
      behind. Yes! This was a funny \'93small\'94 business, however it turned\
      out; still it was in a proper church and would be in the proper\
      papers to-morrow morning.\
\
      They had begun a hymn; she could hear the ninth baronet across\
      the aisle, singing of the hosts of Midian. Her little finger\
      touched Val's thumb\'97they were holding the same hymn-book\'97and a\
      tiny thrill passed through her, preserved\'97from twenty years ago.\
      He stooped and whispered:\
\
      \'93I say, d'you remember the rat?\'94 The rat at their wedding in Cape\
      Colony, which had cleaned its whiskers behind the table at the\
      Registrar's! And between her little and third forgers she\
      squeezed his thumb hard.\
\
      The hymn was over, the prelate had begun to deliver his\
      discourse. He told them of the dangerous times they lived in, and\
      the awful conduct of the House of Lords in connection with\
      divorce. They were all soldiers\'97he said\'97in the trenches under the\
      poisonous gas of the Prince of Darkness, and must be manful. The\
      purpose of marriage was children, not mere sinful happiness.\
\
      An imp danced in Holly's eyes\'97Val's eyelashes were meeting.\
      Whatever happened; he must not snore. Her finger and thumb closed\
      on his thigh till he stirred uneasily.\
\
      The discourse was over, the danger past. They were signing in the\
      vestry; and general relaxation had set in.\
\
      A voice behind her said:\
\
      \'93Will she stay the course?\'94\
\
      \'93Who's that?\'94 she whispered.\
\
      \'93Old George Forsyte!\'94\
\
      Holly demurely scrutinized one of whom she had often heard. Fresh\
      from South Africa, and ignorant of her kith and kin, she never\
      saw one without an almost childish curiosity. He was very big,\
      and very dapper; his eyes gave her a funny feeling of having no\
      particular clothes.\
\
      \'93They're off!\'94 she heard him say.\
\
      They came, stepping from the chancel. Holly looked first in young\
      Mont's face. His lips and ears were twitching, his eyes, shifting\
      from his feet to the hand within his arm, stared suddenly before\
      them as if to face a firing party. He gave Holly the feeling that\
      he was spiritually intoxicated. But Fleur! Ah! That was\
      different. The girl was perfectly composed, prettier than ever,\
      in her white robes and veil over her banged dark chestnut hair;\
      her eyelids hovered demure over her dark hazel eyes. Outwardly,\
      she seemed all there. But inwardly, where was she? As those two\
      passed, Fleur raised her eyelids\'97the restless glint of those\
      clear whites remained on Holly's vision as might the flutter of\
      caged bird's wings.\
\
      In Green Street Winifred stood to receive, just a little less\
      composed than usual. Soames' request for the use of her house had\
      come on her at a deeply psychological moment. Under the influence\
      of a remark of Prosper Profond, she had begun to exchange her\
      Empire for Expressionistic furniture. There were the most amusing\
      arrangements, with violet, green, and orange blobs and scriggles,\
      to be had at Mealard's. Another month and the change would have\
      been complete. Just now, the very \'93intriguing\'94 recruits she had\
      enlisted, did not march too well with the old guard. It was as if\
      her regiment were half in khaki, half in scarlet and bearskins.\
      But her strong and comfortable character made the best of it in a\
      drawing-room which typified, perhaps, more perfectly than she\
      imagined, the semi-bolshevized imperialism of her country. After\
      all, this was a day of merger, and you couldn't have too much of\
      it! Her eyes travelled indulgently among her guests. Soames had\
      gripped the back of a buhl chair; young Mont was behind that\
      \'93awfully amusing\'94 screen, which no one as yet had been able to\
      explain to her. The ninth baronet had shied violently at a round\
      scarlet table, inlaid under glass with blue Australian butteries'\
      wings, and was clinging to her Louis-Quinze cabinet; Francie\
      Forsyte had seized the new mantel-board, finely carved with\
      little purple grotesques on an ebony ground; George, over by the\
      old spinet, was holding a little sky-blue book as if about to\
      enter bets; Prosper Profond was twiddling the knob of the open\
      door, black with peacock-blue panels; and Annette's hands, close\
      by, were grasping her own waist; two Muskhams clung to the\
      balcony among the plants, as if feeling ill; Lady Mont, thin and\
      brave-looking, had taken up her long-handled glasses and was\
      gazing at the central light shade, of ivory and orange dashed\
      with deep magenta, as if the heavens had opened. Everybody, in\
      fact, seemed holding on to something. Only Fleur, still in her\
      bridal dress, was detached from all support, flinging her words\
      and glances to left and right.\
\
      The room was full of the bubble and the squeak of conversation.\
      Nobody could hear anything that anybody said; which seemed of\
      little consequence, since no one waited for anything so slow as\
      an answer. Modern conversation seemed to Winifred so different\
      from the days of her prime, when a drawl was all the vogue. Still\
      it was \'93amusing,\'94 which, of course, was all that mattered. Even\
      the Forsytes were talking with extreme rapidity\'97Fleur and\
      Christopher, and Imogen, and young Nicholas's youngest, Patrick.\
      Soames, of course, was silent; but George, by the spinet, kept up\
      a running commentary, and Francie, by her mantel-shelf. Winifred\
      drew nearer to the ninth baronet. He seemed to promise a certain\
      repose; his nose was fine and drooped a little, his grey\
      moustaches too; and she said, drawling through her smile:\
\
      \'93It's rather nice, isn't it?\'94\
\
      His reply shot out of his smile like a snipped bread pellet\
\
      \'93D'you remember, in Frazer, the tribe that buries the bride up to\
      the waist?\'94\
\
      He spoke as fast as anybody! He had dark lively little eyes, too,\
      all crinkled round like a Catholic priest's. Winifred felt\
      suddenly he might say things she would regret.\
\
      \'93They're always so amusing\'97weddings,\'94 she murmured, and moved on\
      to Soames. He was curiously still, and Winifred saw at once what\
      was dictating his immobility. To his right was George Forsyte, to\
      his left Annette and Prosper Profond. He could not move without\
      either seeing those two together, or the reflection of them in\
      George Forsyte's japing eyes. He was quite right not to be taking\
      notice.\
\
      \'93They say Timothy's sinking;\'94 he said glumly.\
\
      \'93Where will you put him, Soames?\'94\
\
      \'93Highgate.\'94 He counted on his fingers. \'93It'll make twelve of them\
      there, including wives. How do you think Fleur looks?\'94\
\
      \'93Remarkably well.\'94\
\
      Soames nodded. He had never seen her look prettier, yet he could\
      not rid himself of the impression that this business was\
      unnatural\'97remembering still that crushed figure burrowing into\
      the corner of the sofa. From that night to this day he had\
      received from her no confidences. He knew from his chauffeur that\
      she had made one more attempt on Robin Hill and drawn blank\'97an\
      empty house, no one at home. He knew that she had received a\
      letter, but not what was in it, except that it had made her hide\
      herself and cry. He had remarked that she looked at him sometimes\
      when she thought he wasn't noticing, as if she were wondering\
      still what he had done\'97forsooth\'97to make those people hate him so.\
      Well, there it was! Annette had come back, and things had worn on\
      through the summer\'97very miserable, till suddenly Fleur had said\
      she was going to marry young Mont. She had shown him a little\
      more affection when she told him that. And he had yielded\'97what\
      was the good of opposing it? God knew that he had never wished to\
      thwart her in anything! And the young man seemed quite delirious\
      about her. No doubt she was in a reckless mood, and she was\
      young, absurdly young. But if he opposed her, he didn't know what\
      she would do; for all he could tell she might want to take up a\
      profession, become a doctor or solicitor, some nonsense. She had\
      no aptitude for painting, writing, music, in his view the\
      legitimate occupations of unmarried women, if they must do\
      something in these days. On the whole, she was safer married, for\
      he could see too well how feverish and restless she was at home.\
      Annette, too, had been in favour of it\'97Annette, from behind the\
      veil of his refusal to know what she was about, if she was about\
      anything. Annette had said: \'93Let her marry this young man. He is\
      a nice boy\'97not so highty-flighty as he seems.\'94 Where she got her\
      expressions, he didn't know\'97but her opinion soothed his doubts.\
      His wife, whatever her conduct, had clear eyes and an almost\
      depressing amount of common sense. He had settled fifty thousand\
      on Fleur, taking care that there was no cross settlement in case\
      it didn't turn out well. Could it turn out well? She had not got\
      over that other boy\'97he knew. They were to go to Spain for the\
      honeymoon. He would be even lonelier when she was gone. But\
      later, perhaps, she would forget, and turn to him again!\
      Winifred's voice broke on his reverie.\
\
      \'93Why! Of all wonders-June!\'94\
\
      There, in a djibbah\'97what things she wore!\'97with her hair straying\
      from under a fillet, Soames saw his cousin, and Fleur going\
      forward to greet her. The two passed from their view out on to\
      the stairway.\
\
      \'93Really,\'94 said Winifred, \'93she does the most impossible things!\
      Fancy her coming!\'94\
\
      \'93What made you ask her?\'94 muttered Soames.\
\
      \'93Because I thought she wouldn't accept, of course.\'94\
\
      Winifred had forgotten that behind conduct lies the main trend of\
      character; or, in other words, omitted to remember that Fleur was\
      now a \'93lame duck.\'94\
\
      On receiving her invitation, June had first thought, 'I wouldn't\
      go near them for the world!' and then, one morning, had awakened\
      from a dream of Fleur waving to her from a boat with a wild\
      unhappy gesture. And she had changed her mind.\
\
      When Fleur came forward and said to her, \'93Do come up while I'm\
      changing my dress,\'94 she had followed up the stairs. The girl led\
      the way into Imogen's old bedroom, set ready for her toilet.\
\
      June sat down on the bed, thin and upright, like a little spirit\
      in the sear and yellow. Fleur locked the door.\
\
      The girl stood before her divested of her wedding dress. What a\
      pretty thing she was!\
\
      \'93I suppose you think me a fool,\'94 she said, with quivering lips,\
      \'93when it was to have been Jon. But what does it matter? Michael\
      wants me, and I don't care. It'll get me away from home.\'94 Diving\
      her hand into the frills on her breast, she brought out a letter.\
      \'93Jon wrote me this.\'94\
\
      June read: \'93Lake Okanagen, British Columbia. I'm not coming back\
      to England. Bless you always. Jon.\'94\
\
      \'93She's made safe, you see,\'94 said Fleur.\
\
      June handed back the letter.\
\
      \'93That's not fair to Irene,\'94 she said, \'93she always told Jon he\
      could do as he wished.\'94\
\
      Fleur smiled bitterly. \'93Tell me, didn't she spoil your life too?\'94\
      June looked up. \'93Nobody can spoil a life, my dear. That's\
      nonsense. Things happen, but we bob up.\'94\
\
      With a sort of terror she saw the girl sink on her knees and bury\
      her face in the djibbah. A strangled sob mounted to June's ears.\
\
      \'93It's all right\'97all right,\'94 she murmured, \'93Don't! There, there!\'94\
\
      But the point of the girl's chin was pressed ever closer into her\
      thigh, and the sound was dreadful of her sobbing.\
\
      Well, well! It had to come. She would feel better afterward! June\
      stroked the short hair of that shapely head; and all the\
      scattered mother-sense in her focussed itself and passed through\
      the tips of her fingers into the girl's brain.\
\
      \'93Don't sit down under it, my dear,\'94 she said at last. \'93We can't\
      control life, but we can fight it. Make the best of things. I've\
      had to. I held on, like you; and I cried, as you're crying now.\
      And look at me!\'94\
\
      Fleur raised her head; a sob merged suddenly into a little choked\
      laugh. In truth it was a thin and rather wild and wasted spirit\
      she was looking at, but it had brave eyes.\
\
      \'93All right!\'94 she said. \'93I'm sorry. I shall forget him, I suppose,\
      if I fly fast and far enough.\'94\
\
      And, scrambling to her feet, she went over to the wash-stand.\
\
      June watched her removing with cold water the traces of emotion.\
      Save for a little becoming pinkness there was nothing left when\
      she stood before the mirror. June got off the bed and took a\
      pin-cushion in her hand. To put two pins into the wrong places\
      was all the vent she found for sympathy.\
\
      \'93Give me a kiss,\'94 she said when Fleur was ready, and dug her chin\
      into the girl's warm cheek.\
\
      \'93I want a whiff,\'94 said Fleur; \'93don't wait.\'94\
\
      June left her, sitting on the bed with a cigarette between her\
      lips and her eyes half closed, and went down-stairs. In the\
      doorway of the drawing-room stood Soames as if unquiet at his\
      daughter's tardiness. June tossed her head and passed down on to\
      the half-landing. Her cousin Francie was standing there.\
\
      \'93Look!\'94 said June, pointing with her chin at Soames. \'93That man's\
      fatal!\'94\
\
      \'93How do you mean,\'94 said Francie, \'93fatal?\'94\
\
      June did not answer her. \'93I shan't wait to see them off,\'94 she\
      said. \'93Good-bye!\'94\
\
      \'93Good-bye!\'94 said Francie, and her eyes, of a Celtic grey,\
      goggled. That old feud! Really, it was quite romantic!\
\
      Soames, moving to the well of the staircase, saw June go, and\
      drew a breath of satisfaction. Why didn't Fleur come? They would\
      miss their train. That train would bear her away from him, yet he\
      could not help fidgeting at the thought that they would lose it.\
      And then she did come, running down in her tan-coloured frock and\
      black velvet cap, and passed him into the drawing-room. He saw\
      her kiss her mother, her aunt, Val's wife, Imogen, and then come\
      forth, quick and pretty as ever. How would she treat him at this\
      last moment of her girlhood? He couldn't hope for much!\
\
      Her lips pressed the middle of his cheek.\
\
      \'93Daddy!\'94 she said, and was past and gone! Daddy! She hadn't\
      called him that for years. He drew a long breath and followed\
      slowly down. There was all the folly with that confetti stuff and\
      the rest of it to go through with yet. But he would like just to\
      catch her smile, if she leaned out, though they would hit her in\
      the eye with the shoe, if they didn't take care. Young Mont's\
      voice said fervently in his ear:\
\
      \'93Good-bye, sir; and thank you! I'm so fearfully bucked.\'94\
\
      \'93Good-bye,\'94 he said; \'93don't miss your train.\'94\
\
      He stood on the bottom step but three, whence he could see above\
      the heads\'97the silly hats and heads. They were in the car now; and\
      there was that stuff, showering, and there went the shoe. A flood\
      of something welled up in Soames, and\'97he didn't know\'97he couldn't\
      see!\
\
\
\
\
      XI.\'97THE LAST OF THE OLD FORSYTES\
\
      When they came to prepare that terrific symbol Timothy\
      Forsyte\'97the one pure individualist left, the only man who hadn't\
      heard of the Great War\'97they found him wonderful\'97not even death\
      had undermined his soundness.\
\
      To Smither and Cook that preparation came like final evidence of\
      what they had never believed possible\'97the end of the old Forsyte\
      family on earth. Poor Mr. Timothy must now take a harp and sing\
      in the company of Miss Forsyte, Mrs. Julia, Miss Hester; with Mr.\
      Jolyon, Mr. Swithin, Mr. James, Mr. Roger, and Mr. Nicholas of\
      the party. Whether Mrs. Hayman would be there was more doubtful,\
      seeing that she had been cremated. Secretly Cook thought that Mr.\
      Timothy would be upset\'97he had always been so set against barrel\
      organs. How many times had she not said: \'93Drat the thing! There\
      it is again! Smither, you'd better run up and see what you can\
      do.\'94 And in her heart she would so have enjoyed the tunes, if she\
      hadn't known that Mr. Timothy would ring the bell in a minute and\
      say: \'93Here, take him a halfpenny and tell him to move on.\'94 Often\
      they had been obliged to add threepence of their own before the\
      man would go\'97Timothy had ever underrated the value of emotion.\
      Luckily he had taken the organs for blue-bottles in his last\
      years, which had been a comfort, and they had been able to enjoy\
      the tunes. But a harp! Cook wondered. It was a change! And Mr.\
      Timothy had never liked change. But she did not speak of this to\
      Smither, who did so take a line of her own in regard to heaven\
      that it quite put one about sometimes.\
\
      She cried while Timothy was being prepared, and they all had\
      sherry afterward out of the yearly Christmas bottle, which would\
      not be needed now. Ah! dear! She had been there five-and-forty\
      years and Smither three-and-forty! And now they would be going to\
      a tiny house in Tooting, to live on their savings and what Miss\
      Hester had so kindly left them\'97for to take fresh service after\
      the glorious past\'97No! But they would like just to see Mr. Soames\
      again, and Mrs. Dartie, and Miss Francie, and Miss Euphemia. And\
      even if they had to take their own cab, they felt they must go to\
      the funeral. For six years Mr. Timothy had been their baby,\
      getting younger and younger every day, till at last he had been\
      too young to live.\
\
      They spent the regulation hours of waiting in polishing and\
      dusting, in catching the one mouse left, and asphyxiating the\
      last beetle so as to leave it nice, discussing with each other\
      what they would buy at the sale. Miss Ann's workbox; Miss Juley's\
      (that is Mrs. Julia's) seaweed album; the fire-screen Miss Hester\
      had crewelled; and Mr. Timothy's hair\'97little golden curls, glued\
      into a black frame. Oh! they must have those\'97only the price of\
      things had gone up so!\
\
      It fell to Soames to issue invitations for the funeral. He had\
      them drawn up by Gradman in his office\'97only blood relations, and\
      no flowers. Six carriages were ordered. The Will would be read\
      afterward at the house.\
\
      He arrived at eleven o'clock to see that all was ready. At a\
      quarter past old Gradman came in black gloves and crape on his\
      hat. He and Soames stood in the drawing-room waiting. At\
      half-past eleven the carriages drew up in a long row. But no one\
      else appeared. Gradman said:\
\
      \'93It surprises me, Mr. Soames. I posted them myself.\'94\
\
      \'93I don't know,\'94 said Soames; \'93he'd lost touch with the family.\'94\
      Soames had often noticed in old days how much more neighbourly\
      his family were to the dead than to the living. But, now, the way\
      they had flocked to Fleur's wedding and abstained from Timothy's\
      funeral, seemed to show some vital change. There might, of\
      course, be another reason; for Soames felt that if he had not\
      known the contents of Timothy's Will, he might have stayed away\
      himself through delicacy. Timothy had left a lot of money, with\
      nobody in particular to leave it to. They mightn't like to seem\
      to expect something.\
\
      At twelve o'clock the procession left the door; Timothy alone in\
      the first carriage under glass. Then Soames alone; then Gradman\
      alone; then Cook and Smither together. They started at a walk,\
      but were soon trotting under a bright sky. At the entrance to\
      Highgate Cemetery they were delayed by service in the Chapel.\
      Soames would have liked to stay outside in the sunshine. He\
      didn't believe a word of it; on the other hand, it was a form of\
      insurance which could not safely be neglected, in case there\
      might be something in it after all.\
\
      They walked up two and two\'97he and Gradman, Cook and Smither\'97to\
      the family vault. It was not very distinguished for the funeral\
      of the last old Forsyte.\
\
      He took Gradman into his carriage on the way back to the\
      Bayswater Road with a certain glow in his heart. He had a\
      surprise in pickle for the old chap who had served the Forsytes\
      four-and-fifty years-a treat that was entirely his doing. How\
      well he remembered saying to Timothy the day\'97after Aunt Hester's\
      funeral: \'93Well; Uncle Timothy, there's Gradman. He's taken a lot\
      of trouble for the family. What do you say to leaving him five\
      thousand?\'94 and his surprise, seeing the difficulty there had been\
      in getting Timothy to leave anything, when Timothy had nodded.\
      And now the old chap would be as pleased as Punch, for Mrs.\
      Gradman, he knew, had a weak heart, and their son had lost a leg\
      in the War. It was extraordinarily gratifying to Soames to have\
      left him five thousand pounds of Timothy's money. They sat down\
      together in the little drawing-room, whose walls\'97like a vision of\
      heaven\'97were sky-blue and gold with every picture-frame\
      unnaturally bright, and every speck of dust removed from every\
      piece of furniture, to read that little masterpiece\'97the Will of\
      Timothy. With his back to the light in Aunt Hester's chair,\
      Soames faced Gradman with his face to the light, on Aunt Ann's\
      sofa; and, crossing his legs, began:\
\
      \'93This is the last Will and Testament of me Timothy Forsyte of The\
      Bower Bayswater Road, London I appoint my nephew Soames Forsyte\
      of The Shelter Mapleduram and Thomas Gradman of 159 Folly Road\
      Highgate (hereinafter called my Trustees) to be the trustees and\
      executors of this my Will To the said Soames Forsyte I leave the\
      sum of one thousand pounds free of legacy duty and to the said\
      Thomas Gradman I leave the sum of five thousand pounds free of\
      legacy duty.\'94\
\
      Soames paused. Old Gradman was leaning forward, convulsively\
      gripping a stout black knee with each of his thick hands; his\
      mouth had fallen open so that the gold fillings of three teeth\
      gleamed; his eyes were blinking, two tears rolled slowly out of\
      them. Soames read hastily on.\
\
      \'93All the rest of my property of whatsoever description I bequeath\
      to my Trustees upon Trust to convert and hold the same upon the\
      following trusts namely To pay thereout all my debts funeral\
      expenses and outgoings of any kind in connection with my Will and\
      to hold the residue thereof in trust for that male lineal\
      descendant of my father Jolyon Forsyte by his marriage with Ann\
      Pierce who after the decease of all lineal descendants whether\
      male or female of my said father by his said marriage in being at\
      the time of my death shall last attain the age of twenty-one\
      years absolutely it being my desire that my property shall be\
      nursed to the extreme limit permitted by the laws of England for\
      the benefit of such male lineal descendant as aforesaid.\'94\
\
      Soames read the investment and attestation clauses, and, ceasing,\
      looked at Gradman. The old fellow was wiping his brow with a\
      large handkerchief, whose brilliant colour supplied a sudden\
      festive tinge to the proceedings.\
\
      \'93My word, Mr. Soames!\'94 he said, and it was clear that the lawyer\
      in him had utterly wiped out the man: \'93My word! Why, there are\
      two babies now, and some quite young children\'97if one of them\
      lives to be eighty\'97it's not a great age\'97and add twenty-one\'97that's\
      a hundred years; and Mr. Timothy worth a hundred and fifty\
      thousand pound net if he's worth a penny. Compound interest at\
      five per cent. doubles you in fourteen years. In fourteen years\
      three hundred thousand-six hundred thousand in\
      twenty-eight\'97twelve hundred thousand in forty-two\'97twenty-four\
      hundred thousand in fifty-six\'97four million eight hundred thousand\
      in seventy\'97nine million six hundred thousand in eighty-four\'97Why,\
      in a hundred years it'll be twenty million! And we shan't live to\
      use it! It is a Will!\'94\
\
      Soames said dryly: \'93Anything may happen. The State might take the\
      lot; they're capable of anything in these days.\'94\
\
      \'93And carry five,\'94 said Gradman to himself. \'93I forgot\'97Mr.\
      Timothy's in Consols; we shan't get more than two per cent. with\
      this income tax. To be on the safe side, say eight millions.\
      Still, that's a pretty penny.\'94\
\
      Soames rose and handed him the Will. \'93You're going into the City.\
      Take care of that, and do what's necessary. Advertise; but there\
      are no debts. When's the sale?\'94\
\
      \'93Tuesday week,\'94 said Gradman. \'93Life or lives in bein' and\
      twenty-one years afterward\'97it's a long way off. But I'm glad he's\
      left it in the family....\'94\
\
      The sale\'97not at Jobson's, in view of the Victorian nature of the\
      effects\'97was far more freely attended than the funeral, though not\
      by Cook and Smither, for Soames had taken it on himself to give\
      them their heart's desires. Winifred was present, Euphemia, and\
      Francie, and Eustace had come in his car. The miniatures,\
      Barbizons, and J. R. drawings had been bought in by Soames; and\
      relics of no marketable value were set aside in an off-room for\
      members of the family who cared to have mementoes. These were the\
      only restrictions upon bidding characterised by an almost tragic\
      languor. Not one piece of furniture, no picture or porcelain\
      figure appealed to modern taste. The humming birds had fallen\
      like autumn leaves when taken from where they had not hummed for\
      sixty years. It was painful to Soames to see the chairs his aunts\
      had sat on, the little grand piano they had practically never\
      played, the books whose outsides they had gazed at, the china\
      they had dusted, the curtains they had drawn, the hearth-rug\
      which had warmed their feet; above all, the beds they had lain\
      and died in\'97sold to little dealers, and the housewives of Fulham.\
      And yet\'97what could one do? Buy them and stick them in a\
      lumber-room? No; they had to go the way of all flesh and\
      furniture, and be worn out. But when they put up Aunt Ann's sofa\
      and were going to knock it down for thirty shillings, he cried\
      out, suddenly: \'93Five pounds!\'94 The sensation was considerable, and\
      the sofa his.\
\
      When that little sale was over in the fusty saleroom, and those\
      Victorian ashes scattered, he went out into the misty October\
      sunshine feeling as if cosiness had died out of the world, and\
      the board \'93To Let\'94 was up, indeed. Revolutions on the horizon;\
      Fleur in Spain; no comfort in Annette; no Timothy's on the\
      Bayswater Road. In the irritable desolation of his soul he went\
      into the Goupenor Gallery. That chap Jolyon's watercolours were\
      on view there. He went in to look down his nose at them\'97it might\
      give him some faint satisfaction. The news had trickled through\
      from June to Val's wife, from her to Val, from Val to his mother,\
      from her to Soames, that the house\'97the fatal house at Robin\
      Hill\'97was for sale, and Irene going to join her boy out in British\
      Columbia, or some such place. For one wild moment the thought had\
      come to Soames: 'Why shouldn't I buy it back? I meant it for my!'\
      No sooner come than gone. Too lugubrious a triumph; with too many\
      humiliating memories for himself and Fleur. She would never live\
      there after what had happened. No, the place must go its way to\
      some peer or profiteer. It had been a bone of contention from the\
      first, the shell of the feud; and with the woman gone, it was an\
      empty shell. \'93For Sale or To Let.\'94 With his mind's eye he could\
      see that board raised high above the ivied wall which he had\
      built.\
\
      He passed through the first of the two rooms in the Gallery.\
      There was certainly a body of work! And now that the fellow was\
      dead it did not seem so trivial. The drawings were pleasing\
      enough, with quite a sense of atmosphere, and something\
      individual in the brush work. 'His father and my father; he and\
      I; his child and mine!' thought Soames. So it had gone on! And\
      all about that woman! Softened by the events of the past week,\
      affected by the melancholy beauty of the autumn day, Soames came\
      nearer than he had ever been to realisation of that truth\'97passing\
      the understanding of a Forsyte pure\'97that the body of Beauty has a\
      spiritual essence, uncapturable save by a devotion which thinks\
      not of self. After all, he was near that truth in his devotion to\
      his daughter; perhaps that made him understand a little how he\
      had missed the prize. And there, among the drawings of his\
      kinsman, who had attained to that which he had found beyond his\
      reach, he thought of him and her with a tolerance which surprised\
      him. But he did not buy a drawing.\
\
      Just as he passed the seat of custom on his return to the outer\
      air he met with a contingency which had not been entirely absent\
      from his mind when he went into the Gallery\'97Irene, herself,\
      coming in. So she had not gone yet, and was still paying farewell\
      visits to that fellow's remains! He subdued the little\
      involuntary leap of his subconsciousness, the mechanical reaction\
      of his senses to the charm of this once-owned woman, and passed\
      her with averted eyes. But when he had gone by he could not for\
      the life of him help looking back. This, then, was finality\'97the\
      heat and stress of his life, the madness and the longing thereof,\
      the only defeat he had known, would be over when she faded from\
      his view this time; even such memories had their own queer aching\
      value.\
\
      She, too, was looking back. Suddenly she lifted her gloved hand,\
      her lips smiled faintly, her dark eyes seemed to speak. It was\
      the turn of Soames to make no answer to that smile and that\
      little farewell wave; he went out into the fashionable street\
      quivering from head to foot. He knew what she had meant to say:\
      \'93Now that I am going for ever out of the reach of you and\
      yours\'97forgive me; I wish you well.\'94 That was the meaning; last\
      sign of that terrible reality\'97passing morality, duty, common\
      sense\'97her aversion from him who had owned her body, but had never\
      touched her spirit or her heart. It hurt; yes\'97more than if she\
      had kept her mask unmoved, her hand unlifted.\
\
      Three days later, in that fast-yellowing October, Soames took a\
      taxi-cab to Highgate Cemetery and mounted through its white\
      forest to the Forsyte vault. Close to the cedar, above catacombs\
      and columbaria, tall, ugly, and individual, it looked like an\
      apex of the competitive system. He could remember a discussion\
      wherein Swithin had advocated the addition to its face of the\
      pheasant proper. The proposal had been rejected in favour of a\
      wreath in stone, above the stark words: \'93The family vault of\
      Jolyon Forsyte: 1850.\'94 It was in good order. All trace of the\
      recent interment had been removed, and its sober grey gloomed\
      reposefully in the sunshine. The whole family lay there now,\
      except old Jolyon's wife, who had gone back under a contract to\
      her own family vault in Suffolk; old Jolyon himself lying at\
      Robin Hill; and Susan Hayman, cremated so that none knew where\
      she might be. Soames gazed at it with satisfaction\'97massive,\
      needing little attention; and this was important, for he was well\
      aware that no one would attend to it when he himself was gone,\
      and he would have to be looking out for lodgings soon. He might\
      have twenty years before him, but one never knew. Twenty years\
      without an aunt or uncle, with a wife of whom one had better not\
      know anything, with a daughter gone from home. His mood inclined\
      to melancholy and retrospection.\
\
      This cemetery was full, they said\'97of people with extraordinary\
      names, buried in extraordinary taste. Still, they had a fine view\
      up here, right over London. Annette had once given him a story to\
      read by that Frenchman, Maupassant, most lugubrious concern,\
      where all the skeletons emerged from their graves one night, and\
      all the pious inscriptions on the stones were altered to\
      descriptions of their sins. Not a true story at all. He didn't\
      know about the French, but there was not much real harm in\
      English people except their teeth and their taste, which was\
      certainly deplorable. \'93The family vault of Jolyon Forsyte: 1850.\'94\
      A lot of people had been buried here since then\'97a lot of English\
      life crumbled to mould and dust! The boom of an airplane passing\
      under the gold-tinted clouds caused him to lift his eyes. The\
      deuce of a lot of expansion had gone on. But it all came back to\
      a cemetery\'97to a name and a date on a tomb. And he thought with a\
      curious pride that he and his family had done little or nothing\
      to help this feverish expansion. Good solid middlemen, they had\
      gone to work with dignity to manage and possess. \'93Superior\
      Dosset,\'94 indeed, had built in a dreadful, and Jolyon painted in a\
      doubtful, period, but so far as he remembered not another of them\
      all had soiled his hands by creating anything\'97unless you counted\
      Val Dartie and his horse-breeding. Collectors, solicitors,\
      barristers, merchants, publishers, accountants, directors, land\
      agents, even soldiers\'97there they had been! The country had\
      expanded, as it were, in spite of them. They had checked,\
      controlled, defended, and taken advantage of the process and when\
      you considered how \'93Superior Dosset\'94 had begun life with next to\
      nothing, and his lineal descendants already owned what old\
      Gradman estimated at between a million and a million and a half,\
      it was not so bad! And yet he sometimes felt as if the family\
      bolt was shot, their possessive instinct dying out. They seemed\
      unable to make money\'97this fourth generation; they were going into\
      art, literature, farming, or the army; or just living on what was\
      left them\'97they had no push and no tenacity. They would die out if\
      they didn't take care.\
\
      Soames turned from the vault and faced toward the breeze. The air\
      up here would be delicious if only he could rid his nerves of the\
      feeling that mortality was in it. He gazed restlessly at the\
      crosses and the urns, the angels, the \'93immortelles,\'94 the flowers,\
      gaudy or withering; and suddenly he noticed a spot which seemed\
      so different from anything else up there that he was obliged to\
      walk the few necessary yards and look at it. A sober corner, with\
      a massive queer-shaped cross of grey rough-hewn granite, guarded\
      by four dark yew-trees. The spot was free from the pressure of\
      the other graves, having a little box-hedged garden on the far\
      side, and in front a goldening birch-tree. This oasis in the\
      desert of conventional graves appealed to the aesthetic sense of\
      Soames, and he sat down there in the sunshine. Through those\
      trembling gold birch leaves he gazed out at London, and yielded\
      to the waves of memory. He thought of Irene in Montpellier\
      Square, when her hair was rusty-golden and her white shoulders\
      his\'97Irene, the prize of his love-passion, resistant to his\
      ownership. He saw Bosinney's body lying in that white mortuary,\
      and Irene sitting on the sofa looking at space with the eyes of a\
      dying bird. Again he thought of her by the little green Niobe in\
      the Bois de Boulogne, once more rejecting him. His fancy took him\
      on beside his drifting river on the November day when Fleur was\
      to be born, took him to the dead leaves floating on the\
      green-tinged water and the snake-headed weed for ever swaying and\
      nosing, sinuous, blind, tethered. And on again to the window\
      opened to the cold starry night above Hyde Park, with his father\
      lying dead. His fancy darted to that picture of \'93the future\
      town,\'94 to that boy's and Fleur's first meeting; to the bluish\
      trail of Prosper Profond's cigar, and Fleur in the window\
      pointing down to where the fellow prowled. To the sight of Irene\
      and that dead fellow sitting side by side in the stand at Lord's.\
      To her and that boy at Robin Hill. To the sofa, where Fleur lay\
      crushed up in the corner; to her lips pressed into his cheek, and\
      her farewell \'93Daddy.\'94 And suddenly he saw again Irene's\
      grey-gloved hand waving its last gesture of release.\
\
      He sat there a long time dreaming his career, faithful to the\
      scut of his possessive instinct, warming himself even with its\
      failures.\
\
      \'93To Let\'94\'97the Forsyte age and way of life, when a man owned his\
      soul, his investments, and his woman, without check or question.\
      And now the State had, or would have, his investments, his woman\
      had herself, and God knew who had his soul. \'93To Let\'94\'97that sane\
      and simple creed!\
\
      The waters of change were foaming in, carrying the promise of new\
      forms only when their destructive flood should have passed its\
      full. He sat there, subconscious of them, but with his thoughts\
      resolutely set on the past\'97as a man might ride into a wild night\
      with his face to the tail of his galloping horse. Athwart the\
      Victorian dykes the waters were rolling on property, manners, and\
      morals, on melody and the old forms of art\'97waters bringing to his\
      mouth a salt taste as of blood, lapping to the foot of this\
      Highgate Hill where Victorianism lay buried. And sitting there,\
      high up on its most individual spot, Soames\'97like a figure of\
      Investment\'97refused their restless sounds. Instinctively he would\
      not fight them\'97there was in him too much primeval wisdom, of Man\
      the possessive animal. They would quiet down when they had\
      fulfilled their tidal fever of dispossessing and destroying; when\
      the creations and the properties of others were sufficiently\
      broken and defected\'97they would lapse and ebb, and fresh forms\
      would rise based on an instinct older than the fever of\
      change\'97the instinct of Home.\
\
      \'93Je m'en fiche,\'94 said Prosper Profond. Soames did not say \'93Je\
      m'en fiche\'94\'97it was French, and the fellow was a thorn in his\
      side\'97but deep down he knew that change was only the interval of\
      death between two forms of life, destruction necessary to make\
      room for fresher property. What though the board was up, and\
      cosiness to let?\'97some one would come along and take it again some\
      day.\
\
      And only one thing really troubled him, sitting there\'97the\
      melancholy craving in his heart\'97because the sun was like\
      enchantment on his face and on the clouds and on the golden birch\
      leaves, and the wind's rustle was so gentle, and the yewtree\
      green so dark, and the sickle of a moon pale in the sky.\
\
      He might wish and wish and never get it\'97the beauty and the loving\
      in the world!\
}